**Growth\
Groups**

**An Introduction for Leaders**

# 

**Stephen Dolley**

**January 2014**

**Material drawn from:**

**Organic Church : Neil Cole**

**Church 3.0 : Neil Cole**

**\
Contents**

[His Presence 3](#his-presence)

[Jesus' Commission 3](#jesus-commission)

[Do what I have commanded you 3](#do-what-i-have-commanded-you)

[Starting small 4](#starting-small)

[What? No bible teacher? 4](#what-no-bible-teacher)

[Front-line Action from the Start 5](#front-line-action-from-the-start)

[Going in His Name 6](#going-in-his-name)

[The Seed and the Soils 7](#the-seed-and-the-soils)

[Finding Good Soil 8](#finding-good-soil)

[Avoiding the bad soil 9](#avoiding-the-bad-soil)

[God's prepared soil 9](#gods-prepared-soil)

[From Seed to Harvest 10](#from-seed-to-harvest)

[How can you keep things on track?
11](#how-can-you-keep-things-on-track)

[A Pattern for Multiplication 11](#a-pattern-for-multiplication)

[Evangelism 12](#evangelism)

[Growth Groups 13](#_Toc439784027)

## His Presence [^1]

Church is not just the gathering of God's people; it is the presence of
Jesus among His people. Without His presence there is no church.

"For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in
the midst of them." (Matt 18:20)

But His presence is not with us simply to observe or comfort or to hear
our prayers, but to lead us in His mission. The promise of His presence
came with a commission:

"All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth. Go therefore
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe
all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the age." (Matt 28:18-20)

Church is ministry BY Jesus, not ministry FOR Jesus and should be
measured not by our attendance but His presence.

By faith we know His presence, and by acting on that faith we see the
results of His presence. This should be at the heart of what it means
for us to be and do church. God dwelling with His people; Christ acting
through His Body.

## Jesus' Commission

### Do what I have commanded you

The Great Commission must be among the scriptures best known by
Christians:

"All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth. Go therefore
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe
all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the age." (Matt 28:18-20)

There is a very important thing to notice about this commission. Jesus
did not say "teach them all I taught you" or "teach them all about me"
or "teach them the bible." He said "teach them to ***obey*** me." This
puts a rather different emphasis on things. Certainly we want to learn
about God and for people to think deeply and intelligently about God. We
therefore value teaching about God. But the emphasis of Jesus commission
is not teaching knowledge, but teaching obedience to Jesus.

Teaching obedience to Jesus is not the same as teaching the stories and
parables of Jesus. It is not the same as teaching the doctrines of
salvation and grace and resurrection. It is not the same as preaching
the gospel and leading people to Christ. All these things are good, but
they are not the great commission. There is only one way to fulfil the
great commission and that is to teach people to ***obey*** Jesus.

People need to be taught how to obey Jesus. It does not come naturally.
They need to be taught how to read the bible, especially the gospels,
how to listen to Jesus speaking to them through the Holy Spirit, how to
believe and trust Him and how to do what He says to do.

Discipleship is like car mechanics; a group of apprentices pouring over
the manual, discussing what it means and how to do it, then going out
and having a go.

### Starting small

Jesus said, "Where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am
there in the midst of them" (Matt 18:20).

The basic unit of church is twos and threes encouraging one another in
obedience to Jesus. That is a good place to start. If we cannot discover
the presence and will of Jesus in groups of two or three, then we cannot
expect to do so with a larger group. If we can't multiply groups of 2 or
3 we will never multiply the church.[^2]

Discipleship is an adventure of faith. It requires people to be open and
real with one another and to be prepared to take risks and make
mistakes. Disciple making is a time consuming business requiring deep
relationships.

### What? No bible teacher?

We must not think that every small group needs a skilled and trained
leader. Three brand new believers can read the scriptures together,
learn from the Holy Spirit and see God answer their prayers.

We must not hold people back because they have not been trained. We must
not teach people to be dependent on us to understand the word. They must
know they can feed themselves. They must know that Jesus Himself has
commissioned them and sends them with His authority to do His work. They
must know they can depend upon the Holy Spirit and the scriptures to be
their teacher.

Our job as teachers is not to give messages *about* the word, but to
demonstrate our conviction that Jesus Himself has the words of life.

"For the word of God is living and active. Sharper than any double-edged
sword, it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and
marrow; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart." (Heb 4:12)

Can you do that? Do we think we can improve on it? Trust the Holy Spirit
to apply His word to a person's life.[^3]

### Front-line Action from the Start

Jesus chose uneducated fishermen to be His disciples and sent them out
on mission immediately. They were not trained in bible study and
leadership. They didn't know how to preach or lead prayer meetings.
Nevertheless, Jesus sent them:

So Jesus said to them again, "Peace to you! As the Father has sent Me, I
also send you." (John 20:21)

"Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be
wise as serpents and harmless as doves." (Matt 10:16)

New believers must learn to trust God right away so, like Jesus, we send
new believers on mission immediately.[^4] But they must know that it is
not us who are sending them but Jesus, and they go with His authority:

"All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth. Go therefore
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe
all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the age." (Matt 28:18-20)

The mission we are sent on is also clear; to do what Jesus did:

Then He called His twelve disciples together and gave them power and
authority over all demons, and to cure diseases. He sent them to preach
the kingdom of God and to heal the sick. (Lk 9:1-2)

Such must be our expectation from the very start of a believer's new
life in Christ. We must teach faith-filled obedience from day 1. "See
one, do one, teach one." A new believer only needs to observe ministry
once before he/she should be having a go themselves. Having ministered
once, they can begin to pass on what they have learnt immediately.

## Going in His Name

The essence of discipleship, and therefore fulfilling the great
commission, is incredibly simple; groups of two or three believers
experiencing the presence of Jesus and ministering Gospel truth and
healing in His authority to unbelievers.

So how and where are you going to start your group of two or three?
Jesus gives us clear and simple instructions:

"Now whatever city or town you enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and
stay there till you go out." (Matt 10:11)

We start by going to a place and asking people "who needs to hear the
gospel?" We are likely to be directed to poor desperate souls whose
lives are in tatters. Then we do what Jesus said to do:

"As you go, preach, saying, 'The kingdom of heaven is at hand.' Heal the
sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons. Freely you
have received, freely give." (Matt 10:7-8)

We minister healing and deliverance to those in need, and we start a
Bible Discovery Group in the new believers home, not ours (Matt 10:11
above). That will ensure the gospel reaches the whole family, not just
an individual.

Then, again following Jesus' example, we baptize new believers
immediately and publicly and let them baptise their converts:

Therefore, when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
made and baptized more disciples than John (though Jesus Himself did not
baptize, but His disciples), He left Judea and departed again to
Galilee. (Jn 4:1-3)

So how do we start? We start *in* the harvest and start small with 2 or
3.

### The Seed and the Soils

Jesus gave instruction about our mission both directly and through
parables. The parable of the soils is very instructive:

"Listen! Behold, a sower went out to sow. And it happened, as he sowed,
that some seed fell by the wayside; and the birds of the air came and
devoured it. Some fell on stony ground, where it did not have much
earth; and immediately it sprang up because it had no depth of earth.
But when the sun was up it was scorched, and because it had no root it
withered away. And some seed fell among thorns; and the thorns grew up
and choked it, and it yielded no crop. But other seed fell on good
ground and yielded a crop that sprang up, increased and produced: some
thirtyfold, some sixty, and some a hundred." And He said to them, "He
who has ears to hear, let him hear!" But when He was alone, those around
Him with the twelve asked Him about the parable. And He said to them,
"To you it has been given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but
to those who are outside, all things come in parables, so that 'Seeing
they may see and not perceive, And hearing they may hear and not
understand; Lest they should turn, And their sins be forgiven them.'"
And He said to them, "Do you not understand this parable? How then will
you understand all the parables? The sower sows the word..." (Mr 4:3-14)

Some important lessons here are:

-   You need good seed -- the Word of God.

-   You need good soil to grow a church.

-   You cannot be sure which soil is good.

-   Three quarters of the seed will prove fruitless.

-   Two thirds of the growth will prove fruitless.

If we have ears to hear and accept these basic truths about sowing the
word, we will save a great deal of heart-ache over trying to make
fruitless situations bear fruit. Concentrate on the fruit-bearing soil
and don't waste time on the rest.

"But whatever city you enter, and they do not receive you, go out into
its streets and say, 'The very dust of your city which clings to us we
wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God
has come near you.' But I say to you that it will be more tolerable in
that Day for Sodom than for that city." (Lk 10:10-12)

"And he who does not take his cross and follow after Me is not worthy of
Me." (Matt 10:38)

Let the fruitful people be a provocation to the fruitless ones. Jesus
did not lack compassion for fruitless people, but He still sent them
away. According to Jesus' interpretation of this parable, fruitless
people are fruitless because they have not given up on the world's
fruits. They want the world plus a bit of Jesus. Jesus said you cannot
serve two masters and He told people so.

### Finding Good Soil

Although we cannot be sure we have found good soil until we see its
fruit, Jesus did tell us where to look:

-   bad people: "I have not come to call *the* righteous, but sinners,
    > to repentance." (Lu 5:32)

-   poor people: "God has chosen the poor of this world *to be* rich in
    > faith and heirs of the kingdom which He promised to those who love
    > Him?" (Jas 2:5)

-   child-like people: "unless you are converted and become as little
    > children, you will by no means enter the kingdom of heaven." (Matt
    > 18:3)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   desperate people: "Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you
    will find; knock, and it will be opened to you." (Matt 7:7 NKJV)

-   despised people: "God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
    put to shame the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
    world to put to shame the things which are mighty; and the base
    things of the world and the things which are despised God has
    chosen, and the things which are not, to bring to nothing the things
    that are, that no flesh should glory in His presence." (1Co 1:27-29)

The police know where the good soil is; ask them!

### Avoiding the bad soil

-   Self-made people: "not many wise according to the flesh, not many
    mighty, not many noble, are called." (1Co 1:26)

-   Self-righteous people: "Those who are well have no need of a
    physician, but those who are sick. I have not come to call the
    righteous, but sinners, to repentance." (Lu 5:31-32)

-   Wealthy people: "How hard it is for those who have riches to enter
    the kingdom of God! For it is easier for a camel to go through the
    eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God."
    (Lu 18:24-25)

Jesus did not exactly encourage half-hearted disciples, He sent them
away! Jesus loved people by confronting them with their choices. He sent
the rich young ruler, whom He loved, away. To do otherwise is cruel,
selfish and counterproductive! [^5]

Now as He was going out on the road, one came running, knelt before Him,
and asked Him, "Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life?" So Jesus said to him, "Why do you call Me good? No one is good
but One, that is, God. "You know the commandments: 'Do not commit
adultery,' 'Do not murder,' 'Do not steal,' 'Do not bear false witness,'
'Do not defraud,' 'Honour your father and your mother.'" And he answered
and said to Him, "Teacher, all these things I have kept from my youth."
Then Jesus, looking at him, loved him, and said to him, "One thing you
lack: Go your way, sell whatever you have and give to the poor, and you
will have treasure in heaven; and come, take up the cross, and follow
Me." But he was sad at this word, and went away sorrowful, for he had
great possessions. (Mk 10:17-20)

### God's prepared soil

In addition to this general guidance about where to look for good soil,
we can expect the Holy Spirit to lead us to good soil where He has been
preparing the ground to receive the word.

"He has made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the face
of the earth, and has determined their pre-appointed times and the
boundaries of their dwellings, so that they should seek the Lord, in the
hope that they might grope for Him and find Him, though He is not far
from each one of us;" (Ac 17:26-27)

"But whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace to this house.' And if
a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on it; if not, it will
return to you. And remain in the same house, eating and drinking such
things as they give, for the labourer is worthy of his wages. Do not go
from house to house." (Lk 10:5-7)

Some important points arise from these scriptures:

-   God has set the times and places for people to live so they might
    seek and find God: expect your family, neighbours, work colleagues
    and other acquaintances to have been placed in your circle by God so
    they might find Him.

-   Go into people's houses and families with the gospel. Don't expect
    them to come to your church.

-   Bring gospel peace and healing to a whole family, not just
    individuals.

-   If a family receives you, build a close friendship with them.

-   Don't you go house to house; let the family do that, inviting their
    friends to share in their discovery.

If you can't visit people in their houses, look for a place where people
know one another, such as a club or popular café or local bar.[^6]

## From Seed to Harvest

We share the gospel (sow the seed), God transforms a person's life
(brings growth), that person becomes an obedient disciple (bears fruit)
and they minister Christ to others (we reap a harvest). Our place in
this process is to be a friend and an example, teaching a new believer
how to depend on Christ and His word through the Holy Spirit.

The kingdom grows by multiplying healthy disciples.[^7] If a person
turns out to be poor soil we should encourage and challenge them with
the Gospel and make them chose whom they will follow. If they do not
rise to the challenge and follow Jesus faithfully, then don't waste time
on them. Look for better soil.

### How can you keep things on track?

We must trust Jesus to be the head of His church and the Holy Spirit to
lead and teach His children. To impose control over small groups and
churches in order to ensure they conform to some pattern we have decided
upon is to go beyond our remit as disciple makers.

Jesus was perfectly clear and un-phased that 3 out of 4 seeds may
ultimately prove fruitless; that tares will grow up with the wheat; that
false prophets will do mighty wonders without ever knowing Jesus; that
talents will be given which are buried and that many will fall away. In
the light of this we must trust Jesus with His church. Our attempts to
protect what we have by hedging it about with rules only have the effect
of stifling growth and development.

We should teach well, warn people who depart from the simplicity of the
Gospel or who get ensnared by worldliness and pray for God's
intervention. But in the end we must let go. In our care for the church
we should not end up babysitting poor soils, but give ourselves to
working with the good soil.[^8]

## A Pattern for Multiplication

Jesus' commission for discipleship implies multiplying disciples which
leads to multiplying leaders and multiplying churches. Paul was obedient
to this, moving quickly from one place to another leaving a trail of
young churches behind him. Part of Paul's strategy was to maintain a
simple pattern which he taught wherever he went:

Join with others in following my example, brothers, and take note of
those who live according to the pattern we gave you. (Phil 3:17)

Paul does not give us his pattern in a simple form, but it can be
discerned from his letters, and is perhaps summarised by his repeated
themes of faith, hope and love:

"And now abide faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these
is love." (1Co 13:13)

"remembering without ceasing your work of faith, labour of love, and
patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the sight of our God and
Father," (1Th 1:3)

"But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of
faith and love, and as a helmet the hope of salvation." (1Th 5:8)

Works of faith -- healing the sick and delivering people from the snares
of the devil; labours of love -- loving one another as Jesus loves us;
patience of hope -- living life out of our secure position in Christ.
These are then DNA of our discipleship and should be in every aspect of
our private and corporate church life.

Every disciple, every meeting, every ministry must have *all* the DNA at
the same time[^9]; works of faith, labours of love and patient hope in
the sight of our God and Father.

Two other keys are seen here: firstly the leaders MUST set the example.
If you are promoting Growth Groups for your people, it is essential that
the leaders, including the pastor, are also in Growth Groups. Only those
who experience the power of a Growth Group for themselves will be truly
passionate about them. Secondly, you will discover new leaders as you
"take note of those who live according to the pattern we gave you".
Effective leaders will emerge from multiplying Growth Groups.

### Evangelism

The missional life is: Make friends, Throw parties, Tell stories and
Give gifts. Sounds both entirely possible and fun![^10]

Disciples should look for good soil in which to sow the seed of the
word. But what should we sow? How should we present the gospel? For
decades the church has used tracts with a summary of the "gospel" for
evangelism. These typically talk about the problem of our sin, the
solution in the cross and a "sinners prayer". Do you not think it
strange that this "gospel" is not presented in this form anywhere in
scripture. It is even stranger that this "gospel" cannot be easily
derived from the four Gospels. We do well to heed the Gospel which the
Holy Spirit has already designed for us: John said:

Jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples,
which are not recorded in this book. But these are written that you may
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing
you may have life in his name. (Jn 20:30-31)

Those verses describe precisely what we are trying to achieve with our
little tracts. It is time we followed the inspired scriptures rather
than trying to improve on them with our selected verses. The reality is
that unsaved people are not interested in the *means* of our salvation
which our tracts try to explain. They need to hear genuine good news.
The signs which John records are a powerful way of sharing that good
news.

John selected seven *miraculous* *signs*:

1.  Water into Wine (Jn 2:1-12)

2.  Healing of official's son (Jn 4:46-54)

3.  Healing of paralytic at Pool of Bethesda (Jn 5:1-17)

4.  Feeding of 5000 (Jn 6:1-14)

5.  Walking on the water (Jn 6:15-25)

6.  Healing of man born blind (Jn 9:1-41)

7.  Raising of Lazarus (Jn 11:1-46)

A method which has been found very powerful is to get a seeker to take
one story a week and read it every day. Each week meet them and ask:

1.  []{#_Toc439784027 .anchor}What does this passage tell us about
    people?

2.  What does this passage tell us about Jesus or God?

3.  What does Jesus want to say to me personally?

4.  Who does Jesus want me to share this message with?

### Growth Groups

The building block of the church is 2-3 disciples in intimate
relationship. Across the world very small Growth Groups, Discipleship
Groups, Life Transformation Groups -- call them what you like -- have
proved to be the essential foundation of multiplying churches.

With 4 or more, it is very easy for a person to drift into the
background, or for sub-groups to form. Groups of 2-3 are the ideal size
for both accountability and mission:[^11]

"After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by
two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go." (Lk
10:1).

While they were worshipping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said,
"Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called
them." So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on
them and sent them off. (Acts 13:2-3).

See the *Growth Group Handbook* for details of starting and running
Growth Groups.

[^1]: Parts of this section quoted from Organic Church, P54

[^2]: quoted from Organic Church, P99

[^3]: quoted from Organic Church, P66

[^4]: quoted from Organic Church, P132

[^5]: quoted from Organic Church, P71

[^6]: quoted from Organic Church, P177

[^7]: quoted from Organic Church, P98

[^8]: quoted from Organic Church, P69

[^9]: quoted from Organic Church, P118

[^10]: quoted from Church 3.0, P206

[^11]: quoted from Church 3.0, P140
