---
title: Breaking Bread - Part 1 revised
type: document
---
# Breaking Bread -- Part 1 -- The New Passover Supper

Luke 22:7-13 Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover
lamb had to be sacrificed. Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and
make preparations for us to eat the Passover." "Where do you want us to
prepare for it?" they asked. He replied, "As you enter the city, a man
carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him to the house that he
enters, and say to the owner of the house, 'The Teacher asks: Where is
the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?' He will
show you a large room upstairs, all furnished. Make preparations there."
They left and found things just as Jesus had told them. So they prepared
the Passover.

Jesus told Peter and John to prepare for the Passover meal and they
asked Him where it should be. His answer was elaborate and detailed.

It is clear from this that Jesus intended that the celebration should be
properly prepared and also that its location really mattered. Either
Jesus Himself had arranged the place or, as seems likely, the Holy
Spirit made the arrangements having given directions to both Jesus and
the owner of the upper room.

When we compare this to the current usual practice of breaking bread in
a church service, two contrasts are immediately obvious: firstly the
preparation involved in sharing a piece of bread and a cup of wine is
insignificant compared with a meal, and secondly the location in a
church service is entirely different from in a family room. Jesus could
easily have located the meal in the temple court in view of its great
significance and connection with temple sacrifices. Or he could have
located it in a synagogue in nearby Bethel where he was known and loved.
But Jesus intended that it should be in a secular space, in an ordinary
home. We have got so used to \"breaking bread\" in a church service that
it is hard for us to think about this occasion as the disciple would
have. We get a much better idea if we think of celebrating Christmas.
Like Christmas, Passover was a major annual celebration. The meal was a
central and essential part. You could not begin to think of celebrating
it without a big carefully prepared meal. Neither would it occur to you
to have your Christmas meal in church, despite it being a celebration of
Jesus\' birth. Neither would you think of joining in with a dozen other
families to have a big joint affair. You would hopefully want to invite
one or two lonely people to join in with you, or you might want to do
something especially for lonely people. But you would want it to be as
\"authentic\" as possible -- a great meal with a family feel and lots of
conversation and maybe some games. Neither would you dream of asking a
priest to officiate over the celebration. Passover was not Christmas,
but I think it was a lot closer to Christmas than it is to \"breaking
bread\" in a church service.

It was therefore natural for the disciples to ask about its preparation
and location. They were not at home, so needed to find somewhere they
could celebrate. They found a \"man of peace\" to offer his home. He was
not someone the disciples knew, but he welcomed them. No doubt he and
his household helped the disciples cook the meal, prepare the room and
witnessed their celebration. It seems likely that he went on to become a
disciple.

**Luke 22:14-15 When the hour came, Jesus and his apostles reclined at
the table. And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer.\"**

To the disciples, this was just another Passover celebration, one of a
lifetime of such annual celebrations. But for Jesus this was special.
How long had Jesus \"eagerly desired to eat this Passover\" with them?
Since leaving Galilee on their way to the festival in Jerusalem?

\"As the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven, Jesus
resolutely set out for Jerusalem.\" (Luke 9:51)

Or was it since the very beginning of His ministry, when at the wedding
in Cana He said to Mary, \"My hour has not yet come\"? Or had Jesus been
looking forward to this meal since the original Passover back at the
beginning of Israel\'s history? Or perhaps since the Fall or the very
dawn of creation?

The point is that for Jesus this was not *a* Passover celebration but
*the* Passover celebration, to which all previous ones had been
pointing. Judgement has been lifted from God\'s people and would now and
forever pass over them as Jesus Himself becomes our righteousness.

We can only imagine what it must have been like for Jesus to celebrate
this meal with a bunch of people who had no idea of its eternal
significance. I can imagine Him wishing that Elijah and Moses, who he
shared with at the Transfiguration, could have been there. He must have
longed to talk about the big-picture of God\'s eternal purposes and the
true meaning of Passover and the huge significance of the New Covenant.
But instead the disciples kept bringing the focus of conversation back
to themselves -- who would betray Jesus, who was the greatest, who would
never deny Jesus\...

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. **(16)** **For I tell you, I will not
eat it again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God.**" After
taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among
you. For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God comes." And he took bread, gave thanks and
broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you;
do this in remembrance of me."

Jesus again emphasises how unique this occasion is by telling the
disciples that this meal and this drink (v17) would be His last until
the Kingdom had come. He wanted the disciples to understand that this
was a turning point in history that would usher in the Kingdom that they
had spent the previous three years announcing and demonstrating. He is
surely also telling them that the terrible events about to unfold are
not the end, but the fulfilment of the Passover they had been
celebrating for years without properly understanding it.

Jesus did not have to wait long before the Passover was fulfilled in His
death on the cross. One of His first acts after His resurrection was to
eat with his disciples -- something that Luke makes a point of
recording:

Acts 10:48 \"He was not seen by all the people, but by witnesses whom
God had already chosen---by us who ate and drank with him after he rose
from the dead.\"

The point of course is that the Passover is now fulfilled and the
Kingdom has come. We are forever delivered from the kingdom of darkness
into the Kingdom of Light. Up to this point the Passover had been both a
reminder of past deliverance and also a promise of future deliverance.
But that future deliverance had now come and there was no longer a need
to look back to the original Passover. This new Passover was not
something to be remembered, but to be lived and experienced afresh each
day.

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." **(17)** **After
taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among
you.** For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God comes." And he took bread, gave thanks and
broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you;
do this in remembrance of me."

Jesus takes the bread and the cup and gives thanks. This is the
thanksgiving before the meal (saying grace as we might call it). He then
tells the disciples to divide it among themselves. I think this
instruction was intentional and important. He deliberately gave the
disciples responsibility to share the food out because it created an
opportunity for heart attitudes to be revealed -- for good or for bad.
He then used it as an opportunity for teaching them about servanthood
(vv24-30).

Later in the NT we see this working out amongst another group of
disciples:

1 Corinthians 11:17-22 In the following directives I have no praise for
you, for your meetings do more harm than good. In the first place, I
hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among
you, and to some extent I believe it. No doubt there have to be
differences among you to show which of you have God's approval. So then,
when you come together, it is not the Lord's Supper you eat, for when
you are eating, some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. As a
result, one person remains hungry and another gets drunk. Don't you have
homes to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the church of God by
humiliating those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I
praise you? Certainly not in this matter!

For various reasons the traditional churches stopped having a meal when
celebrating the Lord\'s supper. One of the reasons given is because Paul
writes:

> 1 Corinthians 14:40 \"But everything should be done in a fitting and
> orderly way.\"

A meal usually involves a certain degree of disorderliness, especially
compared to a liturgical service. By leaving the meal out, so that all
you have is the thanksgiving, you certainly have something more orderly.
But is this what Jesus wants? Do we really think that God is concerned
with orderliness in our services -- or is His concern the attitudes of
our hearts that give rise to disorderliness? Remember that Jesus\' own
Last Supper was a proper meal, with lively discussion and it also
resulted in a certain amount of argument.

There is no suggestion that Jesus was embarrassed at the disorderliness
of His meal, or that Paul though it would be better to leave the meal
out. For both Jesus and Paul, their response to the bad attitudes that
emerged from the meal was to address the heart attitudes. The meal is an
important aspect of discipleship -- it is an opportunity to show
interest and concern for one another, to talk about Jesus, to serve one
another. It is also an opportunity for selfishness and bad attitudes to
be seen so that the deeper needs of the community can be identified and
addressed.

I suggest therefore that both the meal, and the instruction that the
members should share it amongst themselves, are important aspects of
what Jesus instructed us to do together. Leaving these aspects out
removes the opportunity for discipleship.

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." After taking the
cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. **(18)
For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until
the kingdom of God comes."** And he took bread, gave thanks and broke
it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you; do this
in remembrance of me."

We have already seen that Jesus ate and drank with the disciples and
many others after the resurrection, so we can take those meals as proof
that Jesus considered that His Kingdom had indeed come.

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." After taking the
cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. For I
tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the
kingdom of God comes." **(19) And he took bread, gave thanks and broke
it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you; do this
in remembrance of me."**

Jesus now introduces a completely new idea into the Passover meal. Jesus
points to the ***bread*** they are sharing and eating, not the Passover
lamb! Jesus was the Passover Lamb (as John the Baptist recognised --
John 1:29 "Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world!\") so we would expect Jesus to say \"This *lamb* is My Body
broken for you\" but instead He points to the bread. He calls the bread
\"My body\" but He doesn\'t say it is *broken* for them, but *given* for
them. This is clearly a reference to what He had previously said about
being the Bread of Life that the Father gave:

> John 6:32-59 \"My Father gives you the true bread from heaven \... I
> am the bread of life \... This bread is my flesh, which I will give
> for the life of the world \... my flesh is real food and my blood is
> real drink \... The words I have spoken to you---they are full of the
> Spirit and life.\"

Here Jesus tells us that He Himself is the food and drink we need to
sustain us in life. Jesus clearly means His teaching and His example and
not just His sacrificial death -- \"\[My\] words \... are full of the
Spirit and life\". So we conclude that in the Last Supper Jesus offered
the bread as a symbol and reminder of His life and teachings, not just
His death. It is remarkable that Jesus never even mentioned the Passover
Lamb.

The fact that Jesus diverts attention towards the bread suggests to me
that He intended the focus of the meal to be a remembrance of His life
and teachings, rather than dwelling on His death.

A further indication of this is His use of the phrase \"do this in
remembrance of me.\" It is inconceivable that Jesus was concerned that
we might forget that He died for us unless we regularly broke-bread in
order to remember it! Think about this. Do you think we need to break
bread to stop us forgetting that Jesus died? The Salvation Army don\'t
celebrate the Last Supper but they have not forgotten the Cross. The
idea that we need to celebrate the Last Supper lest we forget the Cross
is bizarre and ridiculous. That is not what remembrance of the dead is
for. People do not remember the dead to remember their death, but to
remember their lives.

The purpose of celebrating the last supper is not to remind us
***that*** Jesus died for us, but ***why*** He died. His toast at the
end of the meal (Luke 22:20) tells us what Jesus wanted us to remember
-- the New Covenant. In other words the celebration is about His life in
us now, not His death for us 2000 years ago.

\"Do this in remembrance of me\" is very likely a reference to the
Jewish practice of sharing bread and wine in remembrance of the life of
someone who has died:

> Jeremiah 16:4,7(NKJV) \"they shall not be lamented nor shall they be
> buried \... Nor shall men break bread in mourning for them, to comfort
> them for the dead; nor shall men give them the cup of consolation to
> drink for their father or their mother.\"

Jeremiah is writing about a terrible judgement to come where so many
will die that they will be left unburied and un-mourned for. But what we
learn is that the custom was to *break bread and share a cup of
consolation* when someone died (the NIV is not so clear). Jesus adds
this custom to the Passover celebration at the Last Supper because this
meal is not just the remembrance of deliverance, but the remembrance of
an extraordinary *life*. Whenever people remember their dead, they
remember their lives, not the details of their death. That is surely
what Jesus intends for us. We are to feed on His word and His example
and on His living presence with us, remembering that in His death He has
not left us as orphans, but He is forever with us (Matt 28:20) and is
coming again in Glory.

The practice of focussing on the death of Jesus when we celebrate the
Last Supper is, I believe, missing the point. It is His Life that feeds
us, not His death. It seems to me that the focus of conversation when we
celebrate the Last Supper should be the words and life of Jesus and His
present effect on our lives. This is made even clearer in the next verse
in Luke\'s account:

> Luke 22:20 In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying,
> "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for
> you.\"

After they had shared both the meal and their conversation, Jesus raised
the cup in a similar way that we would propose a toast after a special
meal. "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for
you.\" This is the first clear reference in the meal to His death.

But notice that Jesus does not say "This cup is *My blood* which is
poured out for you\" but "This cup is the *new covenant* in my blood,
which is poured out for you.\" Jesus is drawing our attention *to* the
New Covenant, and not dwelling on His death.

The Law of Moses was written on stone tablets, but Jesus\' New Covenant
was to be written on our hearts by the Holy Spirit:

> Jeremiah 31:31-34 "Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I
> will make a new covenant \... I will put My law in their minds, and
> write it on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be
> My people \... they all shall know Me, from the least of them to the
> greatest of them, says the Lord. For I will forgive their iniquity,
> and their sin I will remember no more."
>
> Luke 22:20 "This cup is the **new covenant** in my blood, which is
> poured out **for you**.\"

This is what Jesus was \"toasting\" -- the fact that ***we*** can now
all know the Lord ourselves through the Spirit. Jesus says to celebrate
that He gave Himself ***for us***. Jesus is saying, \"Don\'t you ever
forget what I have accomplished for you. Don\'t go back to the Law.
Don\'t go back to slavery. Don\'t forget that I am with you always and
alive forevermore. Don\'t forget that you are seated with me in the
heavenly places to rule with me in My Kingdom. That is why after the
meal Jesus said to them:

> Luke 22:29-30 \"I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred
> one on me, so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and
> sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.\"

This is the point and purpose of celebrating the Last Supper \"in
remembrance of me\".

> John 13:4-12 He got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and
> wrapped a towel around his waist. After that, he poured water into a
> basin and began to wash his disciples' feet, drying them with the
> towel that was wrapped around him \... When he had finished washing
> their feet, he put on his clothes and returned to his place.

The washing of the disciple\'s feet seems to have been the way that
Jesus responded to the argument that Luke tells us broke out:

> Luke 22:24 A dispute also arose among them as to which of them was
> considered to be greatest.

21But the hand of him who is going to betray me is with mine on the
table. 22The Son of Man will go as it has been decreed. But woe to that
man who betrays him!" 23They began to question among themselves which of
them it might be who would do this.

24A dispute also arose among them as to which of them was considered to
be greatest. 25Jesus said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it
over them; and those who exercise authority over them call themselves
Benefactors. 26But you are not to be like that. Instead, the greatest
among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the
one who serves. 27For who is greater, the one who is at the table or the
one who serves? Is it not the one who is at the table? But I am among
you as one who serves. 28You are those who have stood by me in my
trials. 29And I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred one
on me, 30so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

The taking of this second cup was a quite separate act from the
thanksgiving and sharing that took place at the start of the meal. Paul
also makes the distinction between these two acts:

> 1 Cor 11:23-25 For I received from the Lord that which I also
> delivered to you: that the Lord Jesus on the same night in which He
> was betrayed took bread; and when He had given thanks, He broke it and
> said, "Take, eat; this is My body which is broken for you; do this in
> remembrance of Me." In the same manner He also took the cup **after
> supper**, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in My blood. This do,
> as often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me."
>
> **^26 ^**For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you
> proclaim the Lord's death till He comes.

## The Jewish background to the Last Supper

When Jesus instituted the last supper, he did not invent something new,
but fulfilled an existing celebration, the Passover supper. This meal
had a special quality that sets it apart from nearly all other
celebrations. Birthday parties, anniversary meals and reunions all look
back to some past event. Graduation parties, retirement parties,
election parties, last-night parties and so on all celebrate a recent
event. A barbeque might simply be celebrating family and friendship and
perhaps a rare but glorious summer evening.

All of these elements are in the Passover Supper, but there is another
element which makes the Passover unique; it also celebrates a future
event. It looks forward to the coming Kingdom of God. The Israelites
were delivered in the original Passover from the judgement meted out on
their Egyptian "hosts" so that they could embark on a journey towards a
liberated and blessed future in the Promised Land. Each year as they
journeyed they celebrated the Passover meal looking back to its
beginning and forward to its completion. Then, when later generations
settled in that land, they continued to celebrate the Passover, yet
still looking both backwards and forwards. They enjoyed and celebrated
what they now possessed -- which their forbears could only dream about -
but they also looked forward to a more complete experience of God's
Kingdom when the earth would be filled with the knowledge of the glory
of the LORD as the waters cover the sea (Hab 2:14).

The Passover meal was a joining together of past and future events that
gave meaning to the present. It celebrated an identity as God's people,
a calling to bring Light to the world , a deliverance from slavery to
darkness, a journey to inherit God's promises, the present blessing of
God's presence and the assurance of a place in God's glorious eternal
fully expressed Kingdom. All of this was encompassed in the Passover.

Although originally this was celebrated just once a year, by Jesus\' day
it was common practice to celebrate this in the home at least once a
week, if not at every main meal.

To the Jew every meal was a sacred participation in the gifts of God's
bountiful creation. Thanksgivings were offered before and after each
meal, understanding the food and drink as being a means of communion
with God and with one another. The blessing and breaking of the common
loaf formally opened the act of fellowship. On special occasions the
meal was concluded with a cup of mingled wine and water which was
blessed and passed round. The thanksgiving over the cup brought together
the past, the present and the future, by praising God for His provision,
remembering His redemptive action in history and praying for the coming
of His kingdom.

## Jesus' redefinition of the Passover Meal

Jesus redefined the Passover meal, giving it a new beginning, a new
middle and a new end. It is still a meal celebrating the journey of
God's people; it is still about our identity, our calling, our
deliverance our journey and our inheritance. But now Jesus Himself is
all of those things. He is the beginning, the journey and the end.

He Himself is our identity ("the church is his body, the fullness of him
who fills everything in every way." Eph 1:23), He is the Light we are
called to bring to the world, He is our deliverer, He is our sustenance
and our inheritance, He is eternally present with us, He is our hope.
And all of this, not as a memory of the past or as a dream for the
future but present in reality with us now. The architect of the Journey
has come to accompany us and to start sharing out the rewards of its
completion.

## Jesus gave the Passover meal a new beginning -- the Cross.

Jesus came announcing the arrival of the long-awaited Kingdom of God:

"The time has come," he said. "The kingdom of God has come near. Repent
and believe the good news!" (Mark 1:15).

Although Jesus both announced and demonstrated the presence of the
Kingdom and claimed to have bound the strong man and was now plundering
his goods, it seems that all of that was a kind of pre-view to the event
by which He became King and bound the strong man. The Cross was Jesus'
glorification and the moment of Satan's defeat. As He approached
Jerusalem at the beginning of His final week Jesus said,

"The hour has come that the Son of Man should be glorified. Most
assuredly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground
and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it produces much grain" \...
" Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this
world will be driven out. And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will
draw all peoples to Myself." (John 12:23-24, 31-32)

And so, when the time came for Him to become the King of God's Kingdom,
the time of His glorification, when He would be "lifted up" on the
cross, Jesus celebrated the Passover meal:

And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them,
saying, "This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me."
In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "This cup is
the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you" (Luke
22:19-20).

It is notable that the Gospel writers make very little attempt to
explain the logic of the Cross. Why Jesus had to die, how His death
established the New Covenant, how His death obtained forgiveness of sins
and so on -- such questions that seem to occupy so much teaching and
preaching and scholarly writing and debate and disagreement -- get scant
attention in the Gospels. The *mechanism* of the new beginning is not
part of the Supper, only its celebration.

Jesus gives the Passover meal a new beginning -- the Cross. The
remembrance part of the meal is focused on the self-giving of Jesus as
the inauguration of a new covenant. It is not a remembrance of cruel
injustice, nor of the cost of our sin and rebellion; it is not a
remembrance of the example of Love Jesus gave us. Of course we cannot
forget any of those things, but they are not what Jesus said to
remember. Jesus commands us to remember the start of our new covenant
relationship with God our Father. He gave the supper a new beginning.

## Jesus gave the Passover meal a new middle -- feasting on Him.

The supper is a celebration of a new start, but is also more than that.
We don\'t just break the bread, we eat it. We pour out the wine and then
we drink it. As well as a remembrance of the start it is also
*nourishment* for the journey. And the journey itself is new.

The presence of God with us on the journey has a new depth and reality.
Jesus promised he would not leave us orphaned when He was glorified on
the cross. He promised to be with us always, and that the eternal
Godhead would make their home in us. We do *not* feast alone, merely
looking forward to a future real presence. Rather, just like with the
disciples on the road to Emmaus, Jesus accompanies us on the journey and
celebrates the Supper with us. But even more than that, He Himself is
the supper!

\"For my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink. Whoever eats my
flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in them\" (John 6:55-56)

Jesus is the real food that God gives us to sustain us on our journey
towards our inheritance. This is in contrast to the symbolic foods of
Manna, the Passover lamb and the offerings in the Law which were also
eaten. Jesus is the reality to which these things pointed. But Jesus is
also real food in contrast to the many things people crave to feed their
impoverished souls -- wealth, power, popularity, sex. And even, we might
say, Jesus is the real food in contrast to the bread and wine of the
Supper, which of themselves are only symbols of Him. Notice how Jesus
stresses real union with Him: \"they in Me, and I in them\" - words He
repeats after the Supper and again in His prayer before the cross:

\"I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.\" (John 14:20)

\"that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in
you. May they also be in us \... that they may be one as we are one--- I
in them and you in me (John 17:21-23)

When Jesus told the people that they must eat His flesh and drink His
blood, He was not telling them to share the broken bread and poured out
wine of the Lord\'s supper; He was talking about being one with Him;
sharing His life and identity:

\"If you remain in me and I in you, you will bear much fruit; apart from
me you can do nothing.\" (John 15:5)

So Jesus gave Himself as the New Covenant which we remember as the start
of our journey, and He also gives Himself to us as our daily bread for
the journey, sustaining our soul and spirit. We feast on Him.

But we need more than sustenance along the journey. We also need
guidance and companionship and comfort and motivation. Jesus is all of
these as well (Jn 14:16,23,26, 16:13, Matt 28:20). Jesus gave the Supper
a new middle.

## Jesus gave the Passover meal a new end -- His Kingdom on earth.

Jesus gave the Supper a new beginning and a new middle. But as we have
seen, the uniqueness of the Passover meal was in that it also looked
forward to an assured future; and Jesus gave the supper a new end. He
said:

"I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds fulfilment in the
kingdom of God." After taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take
this and divide it among you. For I tell you I will not drink again from
the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes." (Luke 22:15-18.
See also Matt 26:29 and Mark 14:25)

We do not have to wait for long! On the day of the resurrection Jesus
ate fish with the disciples, then broke bread on the road to Emmaus, and
shared breakfast with the disciples on the shores of Galilee, and
according to Peter, Jesus ate and drank with many other witnesses of the
resurrection (Acts 10:41). The fact that Jesus ate and drank with so
many after the resurrection shows us that the Kingdom of God has indeed
come.

And the fifth gospel, Acts, bears powerful testimony that the Kingdom
has indeed come. All the leaders in Jerusalem that had conspired
together to kill Jesus were confronted with the irrefutable evidence
that Jesus was establishing His kingdom through the disciples.

"It is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified but
whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you healed."
(Acts 4:10)

It is this third aspect of the Supper which is perhaps most
misunderstood and challenging to embrace. It wouldn't be a problem if we
could simply see the Supper as looking forward to the Wedding Supper of
the Lamb in Revelation 19:9, but Jesus does not give us that option
(although that is how most Christians actually take it). Jesus did not
put off "eating again until the kingdom comes" to the second coming. He
got on with it as soon as He rose from the dead. The "end" to which the
supper looks has already arrived. The Kingdom has come and Jesus is the
King.

Most of us live as if Jesus came to start a resistance movement rather
than to announce His Kingdom. This is a huge subject in itself and here
is not the place to explore it. But given that the Gospel is the
announcement of the Kingdom, we must recognise that the Lord's Supper is
therefore also a celebration and proclamation of its presence and not
merely an anticipation of a far-off dream.

There is an element that, for the moment, is still in the future - Paul
said: "Whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the
Lord's death until he comes." (1 Cor 11:26). But we must not read this
as if the new end that Jesus gives to the Supper is a distant dream --
the victorious second coming of Jesus. Yes, that is there in part, and
there are aspects of the new end which remain to be inherited in their
fullness. But the radical new end that Jesus has given the Supper is the
Gospel itself -- the announcement that the Kingdom of God has come!
Jesus has met us on the journey and brought our inheritance into our
present.

Jesus is King, here today, on this earth. And it is our commission to
make that fact known and invite people to take part. We are not a
resistance movement waiting for the D-Day landings; they have already
taken place and we are commissioned to take the ground that Jesus has
won and tear down the machinery of oppression that continues to
intimidate and enslave those who are ignorant of the new Kingdom. Our
discipleship consists of laying hold of our inheritance and working it
out in the here and now.

Jesus has given the Supper new meaning, and to share in the Supper is to
share primarily in a celebration -- celebration of the New Covenant,
celebration of the sustaining presence of Jesus and our union with Him,
celebration of His guiding presence with us along the way and
celebration of the present reality of God's Kingdom on earth and our
inheritance of every blessing in Christ.

Of course, along with the celebration there is also recognition of the
cost of our inheritance in Christ's suffering (of which the scriptures
make very little) but also, more significantly, we recognise our
incomplete comprehension and experience of the Kingdom of God. We
continue to long for and pray for the Kingdom to come on earth as it is
in Heaven.

This then, is the Lord's Supper; His remodelling of the Passover supper.

In part 2 we will consider the practice of the Supper and some other
aspects of its meaning.
