---
title: Concerning Robert being suspended
type: document
---
# Concerning Robert

I was shocked to hear you had suspended Robert. I had not heard that he
had committed any grave public immoral sin that would justify such
drastic discipline. We appreciate that we do not know all the facts of
the situation, but what we have heard has alarmed us. It sounds like the
inappropriate exercise of authority to seek to control a brother. What
is the biblical basis for suspending Robert?

Andy says you told him Robert had acted in some way which you felt was
high-handed or disrespectful of you and that you had barred him from
pastoring the church in the hope that Robert would seek God, see the
error of his ways and repent.

The godly exercise of authority within the church is a foundational
issue of great importance to the future of the churches we are
partnering with. As such, from our perspective, this issue is also
crucial to our ongoing relationship with Jonathan.

No one owns the church they lead or the people they have discipled. We
belong to Christ, those we are discipling belong to Christ and the
churches belong to Christ. Jesus expressly said that in the Kingdom,
leaders shall not "lord it" over others.

Robert has laboured in Fendell for years and given himself in love and
sacrifice for the people there. Whatever his status as far as Jonathan
is concerned, Robert has been their pastor under Christ. Robert may have
acted in a way which displeases Jonathan, but in addressing that
Jonathan should seek to serve Christ, serve the church and serve Robert.

To prevent a servant of Christ ministering the gospel to the people who
look to him is a very serious act. How does suspending Robert serve
Christ? How does it further the cause of the Kingdom?

How does suspending Robert serve the church? What effect will this have
on the people? I can imagine that they will see this as some kind of
leadership power struggle -- not something that edifies the church or
sets a good example!

How does suspending Robert serve Robert? Such a drastic measure will
surely provoke bitterness and reinforce the example of wrongful control
and the abuse of power that Jesus spoke against.

How is Jonathan\'s action not lording it over Robert and the church in
Fendell?

What struggle is going on in Jonathan\'s heart that has given rise to
this action?
