---
title: Did Jesus preach the gospel
type: document
---
# The good news of the kingdom of God:

## It starts with Healing

Matthew 4:23; Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their
synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every
disease and sickness among the people.

## It proclaims the "good news of the kingdom"

-   heaven is coming to earth

-   the curse is reversed

-   people are reconciled to God

-   sins are forgiven

-   sickness is healed

-   the possessed are set free

-   the excluded are brought in

## It includes Repentance

Jn 8:31-36 "If you continue in My word, then you are truly disciples of
Mine; and you will know the truth, and the truth will make you free."
... Jesus answered them, "Truly, truly, I say to you, everyone who
commits sin is the slave of sin. ... So if the Son makes you free, you
will be free indeed."

## It includes Jesus as the way and the truth

John 10:9 I am the gate; whoever enters through me will be saved. They
will come in and go out, and find pasture.

John 11:25 Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. The
one who believes in me will live, even though they die;

John 14:6 Jesus said to him, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life;
no one comes to the Father but through Me.

## It includes the Cross for our sins

Mark 10:45 For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve,
and to give his life as a ransom for many."

Matthew 26:28 for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out
for many for the forgiveness of sins.

Isa 53:5 But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for
our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was on him, and by
his wounds we are healed.

Isa 53:10 Yet it was the Lord's will to crush him and cause him to
suffer, and though the Lord makes his life an offering for sin, he will
see his offspring and prolong his days, and the will of the Lord will
prosper in his hand. After he has suffered, he will see the light of
life and be satisfied; by his knowledge my righteous servant will
justify many, and he will bear their iniquities.

### It ends with the offer of Baptism

Jn 3:5 "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the
Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 

## Scriptures

Matthew 4:23; Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their
synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every
disease and sickness among the people.

Matthew 9:35; Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing
every disease and sickness.

In between these two quotes, Matthew inserts the sermon on the mount
(5-7) and the bulk of the healings he records. (a leper, the centurions
servant, Peter's mother-in-law, Many demon-possessed and all who were
sick, calms the storm, two demon-possessed men, a paralytic, girl raised
from the dead, woman with issue of blood, two blind and a mute.) After
this comes teaching about discipleship including the parables.

Matthew 10:7-8 "And as you go, preach, saying, 'The kingdom of heaven is
at hand.' "Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out
demons. Freely you received, freely give.

Mark 1:14-15  Now after John had been taken into custody, Jesus came
into Galilee, preaching the gospel of God, and saying, "The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the
gospel."

Luke 4:18-19 "The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed
me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim freedom
for the prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to set the
oppressed free, to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor."

Luke 4:43; But he said, \"I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom
of God to the other towns also, because that is why I was sent.\"

Luke 7:22 So he replied to the messengers, \"Go back and report to John
what you have seen and heard: The blind receive sight, the lame walk,
those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised,
and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.

Luke 8:1; After this, Jesus travelled about from one town and village to
another, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. The Twelve
were with him,

Luke 9:2 And He sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to
perform healing. 

Isaiah 61, "preach good news to the poor"

# Paul's Gospel

Acts 8:12 But when they believed Philip as he proclaimed the good news
of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized,
both men and women.

1Cor 15:1-5 Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the gospel which I
preached to you, which also you received and in which you stand, by
which also you are saved, if you hold fast that word which I preached to
you---unless you believed in vain. For I delivered to you first of all
that which I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to
the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose again the third
day according to the Scriptures, and that He was seen by Cephas, then by
the twelve.

Paul preached the Gospel of the Kingdom. The following passages all
refer to the Paul:

Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God (Acts 14:22).

And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God (Acts 19:8).

And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching
the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more (Acts 20:25).

And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out
of the prophets, from morning till evening (Acts 28:23).

And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him, Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him (Acts 28:30-31).

# Justified by faith:

The Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector

Luke 18:9--14 To some who were confident of their own righteousness and
looked down on everyone else Jesus told this parable: "Two men went up
to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector. The
Pharisee stood by himself and prayed: 'God, I thank you that I am not
like other people---robbers, evildoers, adulterers---or even like this
tax collector. I fast twice a week and give a tenth of all I get.' "But
the tax collector stood at a distance. He would not even look up to
heaven, but beat his breasts and said, 'God, have mercy on me, a
sinner.' "I tell you that this man, rather than the other, went home
justified before God. For all those who exalt themselves will be
humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted."

He was a morally upright man, he kept the commandments 

Verse 12: "I fast twice a week; I give tithes of all that I get." These
are what you might call "religious" or "ceremonial" acts: fasting and
tithing. -- a religiously devout man

he believed that this righteousness was the gift of God. Verse 11: "The
Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed thus: 'God, I thank you that I am
not like other men.'"

The problem is not whether the man himself has produced the
righteousness he has or whether God has produced it. The problem is: He
trusts in it. This is his confidence. Verse 9: "\[Jesus\] also told this
parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous." Now
make sure you see what this is saying. It is not saying that he is
trusting in himself to make himself righteous. No. He says explicitly he
is thanking God for that. He is not trusting in himself to make himself
righteous. He is trusting in himself that he is righteous with the
righteousness that he believes God has worked in him. That is what he is
trusting.

When it came to justification --- for that is the issue, as verse 14
shows --- this man was trusting in the wrong thing. He was looking at
the wrong basis for his righteousness before God. He was looking at the
wrong ground for his righteousness before God. He was looking at the
wrong person and the wrong righteousness. He was looking to his own
righteousness --- and it was his, not because he created it, but because
he acted it. It was not an alien righteousness. It was inherent in him.
It was in his will and in his heart and in his actions. It was his, and
it was put there, he believed, by God. That is what he was trusting in.

He is not presented as a legalist --- one who tries to earn his
salvation. That is not the issue. One thing is the issue: This man was
morally upright. He was religiously devout. He believed God had made him
so. He gave thanks for it. And that is what he looked to and trusted in
for his justifying righteousness before God --- for his justification.
And he was dead wrong to do so.

# Christ our Righteousness

"God made Christ to be sin who knew no sin so that in him we might
become the righteousness of God" (2 Corinthians 5:21).

By trusting Christ alone, we are united to him. And because we are "in
him," what he is counts for us, his righteousness, his morality, his
devoutness.

Philippians 3:9;

Romans 3:28; 4:4-6; 5:18--19; 10:3--4;

1 Corinthians 1:30;

Galatians 2:16

Settle it once and for all that the dozens of places in the Bible that
make your good behavior the condition of your final salvation are a
condition only as the fruit and confirmation of justification, not the
ground of it. If you do not settle this, you will live in continual
turmoil wondering what all those texts mean that say to Christians:
"Those who do such things will not enter the kingdom of heaven" (1
Corinthians 6:9). Don't submit to that torment. Settle it. All the good
that God requires of the justified is the fruit of justification by
faith alone, never the ground of justification. Let the battle of your
life be there. The battle to believe. Not the battle to perform.

Jesus says of those who are transformed in this way: "Then the righteous
will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father" (Matthew
13:43).

## A real Kingdom

"Assuredly I say to you, that in the regeneration, when the Son of Man
sits on the throne of His glory, you who have followed Me will also sit
on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel" (Matthew 19:28;
see also Luke 22:28-30).

After God resurrected Jesus from the dead, the disciples had a burning
question for Him: "Therefore, when they had come together, they asked
Him, saying, 'Lord, will You at this time restore the kingdom to
Israel?' And He said to them, 'It is not for you to know times or
seasons which the Father has put in His own authority' " (Acts 1:6-7).

They obviously understood that a part of Jesus' mission involved a
restoration of a literal kingdom, with Christ as ruler and the disciples
reigning under Him. Jesus told them, however, that the timing of the
establishing of that kingdom is known only to God the Father (Matthew
24:36).

![https://lifehopeandtruth.com/uploads/images/discern/2014_5/cvc_infographic.jpg](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="7.747316272965879in"}

(Acts 8:12; 14:22; 19:8; 20:25; 28:23, 31). The members of the early
Church also put their focus on the coming Kingdom (Colossians 4:11; 2
Thessalonians 1:5).

![Bethel Church of God](media/image2.png){width="2.1354166666666665in"
height="1.0833333333333333in"}

[[John 10:10]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%2010.10) I am come that
they might have life - and that they might have it more abundantly

The Gospel Jesus Preached

The Gospel Jesus preached was not a message about His person. He did not
go about Galilee and Judea relating all the things He had done. Rather,
He proclaimed a specific message from God the Father. The Apostle Peter
stated: "The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all:) That word, I say, ye know,
which was published throughout all Judaea, and began from Galilee, after
the baptism which John preached" ([[Acts
10:36-37]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2010.36-37)). The
message Jesus brought was from the Father. It was sent to the children
of Israel and was the fulfillment of a prophecy given in the book of
Malachi. "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold,
he shall come, saith the LORD of hosts" ([[Mal.
3:1]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mal.%203.1)). John the Baptist
was the messenger who prepared the way.\
Jesus Christ was the divine Messenger-the Messenger of The Covenant. The
message Jesus brought-the Gospel-is the New Covenant message. Moses was
the mediator of the Old Covenant, but Jesus Christ is the mediator of
the New. The message Jesus brought is the New Testament Gospel. Mark
tells us when this Gospel began: "The beginning of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God" ([[Mark
1:1]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mark%201.1)). John first came
preaching the baptism of repentance. Then we read: "Now after that John
was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the
kingdom of God, And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of
God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel" ([[Mark
1:14-15]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mark%201.14-15)). The
Gospel Jesus brought is the one and only true Gospel. It was a message
about the Kingdom of God.

The Gospel of Christ

Jesus said the Gospel He preached came from the Father. He said, ". . .
I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that
his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even
as the Father said unto me, so I speak" ([[John
12:49-50]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%2012.49-50)). The
message sent from God the Father was the Good News of the Kingdom of
God. Jesus Christ was the Spokesman-the Word that was made flesh and
dwelt among us ([[John
1:14]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%201.14)). His Gospel
ushered in an entirely new age. "The law and the prophets were until
John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man
presseth into it" ([[Luke
16:16]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Luke%2016.16)).

Jesus mentioned the Kingdom of God many times during His public
ministry. Notice a few examples: "And he said unto them, I must preach
the kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore am I sent"
([[Luke 4:43]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Luke%204.43)). "And
Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness and every disease among the people" ([[Matt.
9:35]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Matt.%209.35)). "But seek ye
first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things
shall be added unto you" ([[Matt.
6:33]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Matt.%206.33)). In the Lord's
Prayer He included the request that we pray, "Thy kingdom come" ([[Matt.
6:10]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Matt.%206.10)).

Are There Many Gospels?

About twenty years after the death and resurrection of Christ, the
Apostle Paul warned the Galatians: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed
from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel:
Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would
pervert the gospel of Christ" ([[Gal.
1:6-7]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Gal.%201.6-7)). What was
taking place is that the Gospel of Jesus Christ was being changed to a
gospel about Christ, and His message was lost in the confusion. Paul
warned: "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed" ([[Gal.
1:8-9]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Gal.%201.8-9)).\
Today, many people do not know what the Gospel is. Rather, they believe
a different gospel. They have lost sight of the Gospel of the Kingdom of
God. When Jesus began His ministry He made it clear that to be saved it
was necessary to believe the Gospel. His words were: ". . . The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the
gospel" ([[Mark 1:15]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mark%201.15)).
His parting words of instruction to His apostles were: ". . . Go ye into
all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not
shall be damned" ([[Mark
16:15-16]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mark%2016.15-16)). The
apostles were commissioned to preach the Gospel. This Gospel was not a
message about the Person of Christ; it was the message about the coming
Kingdom of God.\
This was the same message the Apostle Paul preached. Notice the
following passages. They all refer to the Apostle Paul:\
Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God ([[Acts
14:22]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2014.22)).\
And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God ([[Acts 19:8]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2019.8)).\
And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching
the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more ([[Acts
20:25]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2020.25)).\
And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out
of the prophets, from morning till evening ([[Acts
28:23]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2028.23)).\
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him, Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him ([[Acts
28:30-31]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%2028.30-31)).\
There are not many gospels; there is only one true gospel-the Gospel of
the Kingdom of God! This was the message that was consistently taught by
Christ, by the apostles and New Testament evangelists ([[Acts
8:12]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Acts%208.12)), and by the
Apostle Paul.

What Does the Word "Kingdom" Mean?

Jesus was not talking about something that was within the heart of man,
nor was He talking about a church. He was talking about a literal
kingdom. Any dictionary will tell you that a kingdom is a major
territorial unit which has a monarchical form of government with a king
or queen as its head. A kingdom consists of four things: (1) a king or
head of state; (2) territory over which to rule; (3) laws by which to
govern; and (4) subjects over which to rule. All of these requirements
will be met when Jesus returns to establish His kingdom on this earth.
Notice what the prophets foretold:\
For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government
shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish
it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The
zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform this ([[Isa.
9:6-7]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Isa.%209.6-7)).\
I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and
glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should
serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. . . . And the
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High,
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve
and obey him ([[Dan.
7:13-14]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Dan.%207.13-14), [[27]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Dan%207.27)).\
And out of his \[Christ's\] mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he
should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and
he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.
And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF
KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS ([[Rev.
19:15-16]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Rev.%2019.15-16)).\
The angel told His mother Mary: "And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS. He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David" ([[Luke
1:31-32]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Luke%201.31-32)). When
Jesus was asked by Pilate if He was a king, ". . . Jesus answered, Thou
sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came
I into the world. . . " ([[John
18:37]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%2018.37)).\
Jesus Christ will return to this earth to establish a literal
kingdom-the Kingdom of God. Few people today seem to realize this aspect
of Christ's work. Many seem to believe that the Kingdom of God could not
apply to this time of grace. In effect, they reject the Good News of the
Kingdom of God; they do not believe the true Gospel! They refuse to
believe in the coming wonderful world tomorrow. The Bible describes this
coming time.\
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
LORD'S house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many
people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of
the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the
law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among
the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more
([[Isa. 2:2-4]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Isa.%202.2-4)).

Conditions for Entering the Kingdom of God

Jesus came preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. How may we enter
into this marvelous kingdom? Jesus' instruction was, "repent and believe
the Gospel" ([[Mark
1:15]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Mark%201.15)). Jesus gave us
two things to do. We must repent, and we must believe the Gospel.
Believing the Gospel means we must also believe on Jesus Christ, the
King of the coming Kingdom of God. He is not only our King, but our
personal Saviour and great High Priest. Repentance means there has been
a change of mind and heart in each individual who has accepted Christ.
Accepting Christ as personal Savior means we recognize that Christ died
for us, and that we must repent of wrong doing-of sin. To repent means
to change the mind with respect to the Law of God; this change of mind
leads to a change of life. We must repent of sin. What is sin? The Bible
tells us: "Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin
is the transgression of the law" ([[1 John
3:4]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20John%203.4)). Sin is the
violation of the Law of God-the Ten Commandments. Jesus was once asked,
". . . Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal
life?" Jesus replied, ". . . if thou wilt enter into life, keep the
commandments" ([[Matt.
19:16-17]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Matt.%2019.16-17)). Jesus
went on to explain that He was referring to the Ten Commandments.\
The Ten Commandments summarize how to live right in the eyes of God.
They show us how to manifest love to God and toward our fellow man. They
show, in principle, the whole duty of living righteously. They show a
way of life that leads to happiness, peace of mind, and joy. They show a
manner of living that is contrary to human nature and to the customs and
ways of this world. They show the way to eternal life. Jesus said these
two principles are necessary for us to do in order to enter the Kingdom
of God-repent and believe the Gospel!

The Spiritual Birth

Nicodemus, a Pharisee and leader of the Jews, came to Christ at night.
Jesus told him, ". . . Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" ([[John
3:3]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%203.3)). Jesus emphasized
the Kingdom of God and told Nicodemus the most important aspect he
needed to know in order to enter into that kingdom. Jesus said that
unless one is born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. What
did He mean? Nicodemus, bewildered, asked, ". . . How can a man be born
when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and
be born?" ([[John 3:4]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%203.4)).
Nicodemus knew Jesus was talking about a literal birth. Jesus went on to
explain: ". . . Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That
which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born
again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so
is every one that is born of the Spirit" ([[John
3:5-8]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%203.5-8)). So, those
born of the flesh are flesh, but those born of the spirit are spirit.
The Apostle Paul said: "Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God. . . " ([[1 Cor.
15:50]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20Cor.%2015.50)). The birth
Jesus was talking about was the change from flesh to spirit-the change
from mortality to immortality. Jesus was talking about the resurrection
of the dead.\
Paul spoke of the resurrection. He said this of the physical body:\
. . . It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: It is sown
in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is
raised in power: It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual
body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. . . . Now
this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I shew you a
mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality ([[1 Cor.
15:42-44]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20Cor.%2015.42-44), [[50-53]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20Cor%2015.50-53)).\
Jesus instructed Nicodemus that it is possible to be born again, not as
a mortal flesh-and-blood baby, but as immortal spirit. Jesus said, God
is a Spirit ([[John
4:24]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/John%204.24)). The Kingdom of
God will be made up of those who are born of the Spirit. God created man
in His own image-physically. Upon conversion-true repentance and belief
in Christ- man receives only a measure of the Holy Spirit. In the
resurrection those truly converted will be changed into spirit by that
very Spirit dwelling in them. Paul wrote: "But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that
dwelleth in you" ([[Rom.
8:11]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Rom.%208.11)). Man, now
created physically in God's image, is in the process of being created
into His image spiritually ([[1 Cor.
15:49]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20Cor.%2015.49), [[2 Cor
3:18]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/2%20Cor%203.18), [[Col.
3:10]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Col.%203.10)). Paul makes
plain that while flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet
by means of the resurrection those begotten by the Holy Spirit in this
mortal life can, and will be, changed into immortality to be like God
Himself ([[1 John
3:2]{.ul}](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1%20John%203.2)). This is the
birth Jesus spoke of-the spiritual birth into the Kingdom of God. This
is what the Gospel is all about!
