---
title: Thoughts from Luke
type: document
---
## Jesus Baptism

"When all the people were being baptised, Jesus was baptised too. And as
he was praying, heaven was opened" (Lk 3:21 NIV)

Jesus went under the waters bearing the sins of the world. His baptism
anticipated the cross, which he also referred to as a baptism and
associates with Jonah's baptism in the sea (Jonah 1:12)

"You don't know what you are asking," Jesus said. "Can you drink the cup
I drink or be baptised with the baptism I am baptised with?"" (Mk 10:38
NIV)

## Temptation

Whenever we attempt to use our human powers to establish God's kingdom
or allow faith to become the servant of human power we have succumbed to
the third temptation "All these I will give if you bow to me\..."

At Jesus' trial the crowd had to choose Jesus of Nazareth whose kingdom
was not of this world, or Jesus Barabbas, a human messianic
rebel-fighter. They chose the fighter. Even Peter wanted to choose to
fight rather than suffer:

"Jesus turned and said to Peter, "Get behind me, Satan! You are a
stumbling-block to me; you do not have in mind the things of God, but
the things of men."" (Mt 16:23 NIV)

The people were anticipating a Messiah who would bring peace and
prosperity for Israel, if not for the whole world. In the absence of
this most Jews and Gentiles alike have rejected the claims of Christ.
But what He brought was God Himself. Now we know His face and can call
upon Him. We know the path we have to follow. We know our origin and our
destiny. It is only because of our hardness of hearts that we think this
too little.

## The Gospel of the Kingdom

Jesus knew that behind a seemingly positive response was often a heart
of stone:

> "many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
> But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all
> people. He did not need any testimony about mankind, for he knew what
> was in each person." (Jn 2:24)

Q. Why do you follow Jesus? What makes you decide to be obedient to him
rather than go your own way? What makes you be disobedient? What do you
feel like after you have taken a big step of faith?  What do you feel
like after you have been disobedient? \
In all of these situations what matters is your relationship with God.\
Lk5:12-14 the most despised people had great faith in Jesus power to
heal. 

Jesus sent the leper to the priest at the temple which presented him
with powerful evidence that mighty works were being performed by Jesus.
This brought Pharisees and other leaders from all over

Lu15 celebrations because sinners are repenting.

Jesus said three seemingly contradictory things about the Kingdom of
God:

The Kingdom has come here and now

Lk 11:20 the kingdom of God has come to you.

My kingdom is not of this world.

Jn 18:36 "My kingdom is not of this world \... But my kingdom is from
another place."

The king is yet to come

Matt 24:30 "At that time the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the
sky, and all the nations of the earth will mourn. They will see the Son
of Man coming on the clouds of the sky, with power and great glory.
