---
title: Dying
type: document
---
# Spirit of Life

Extract from \"We make the road by walking\", Brian McLaren.

**Philippians 1:20-30**

For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain.

Among the Spirit's many essential movements in our lives is this: to
prepare us for the end of our lives, without fear.

So many us are afraid to even think about death, much less speak of it.
That fear can enslave us and can rob us of so much aliveness. The Spirit
moves within us to help us face death with hope, not fear . . . with
quiet confidence, not anxiety 'The law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus,' Paul said (Rom. 8:2), 'has set you free from the law of sin and
of death.'

Here's a way to think about death. We often speak of God as the one who
was, who is, and who is to come. The God who was holds all our past. The
God who is surrounds us now. And the God who is to come will be there
for us beyond this life as we know it. With that realisation in mind,
death could never mean leaving God, because there is nowhere we can
escape from God's presence, as the psalmist said (139:7). Instead, death
simply means leaving the presence of God in this little neighbourhood of
history called the present. Through death, we join God in the vast,
forever-expanding future, into which both past and present are forever
taken up.

Death is merely a doorway, a passage from one way of living in God's
presence in the present to another way of living in God's presence - in
the open space of unseized possibility we call the future.

To be liberated from the fear of death --- think of how that would
change your values, perspectives and actions. To believe that no good
thing is lost, but that all goodness will be taken up and consummated in
God --- think of how that frees you to do good without reservation. To
participate in a network of relationships that isn't limited by death in
the slightest degree --- think of how that would make every person
matter and how it would free you to live with boundless, loving
aliveness.

So what might we expect to happen when we die? Nobody knows for sure,
but in light of Jesus' death and resurrection, we can expect to
experience death as a passage, like birth, the end of one life stage and
the beginning of another. We don't know how that passing will come \...
like a slow slipping away in disease like a sudden jolt or shock in an
accident. However it happens, we can expect to discover that we're not
falling out of life, but deeper into it.

On the other side, we can expect to experience as never before the
unimaginable light or energy of God's presence. We will enter into a
goodness so good, a richness so rich, a holiness so holy, a mercy and
love so strong and true that all of our evil, pride, lust, greed,
resentment and fear will be instantly melted out of us. We will at that
moment more fully understand how much we have been forgiven, and so we
will more than ever be filled with love\... love for God who forgives,
and with God, love for everyone and everything that has like us been
forgiven.

We can expect to feel a sense of reunion --- yes, with loved ones who
have died, but also with our great-great-great-great-grand- parents and
our thirty-second cousins a thousand times removed whose names we've
never known but to whom we are in fact related. That sense of
relatedness that we now feel with closest of kin will somehow be
expanded to every person who has ever lived. And that sense of
relatedness won't stop with human beings, but will expand infinitely
outwards to all of God's creation. We can expect to feel the fullest,
most exquisite sense of oneness and inter-relatedness and harmony - a
sense of belonging and connection that we approached only vaguely or
clumsily in our most ecstatic moments in this life.

We can expect to feel differently about our sufferings. We will see not
the short-term pain that so preoccupied us on the past side of death,
but instead the enduring virtue, courage and compassion that have been
forged in us through each fall of the hammer on the anvil of pain. So we
will bless our sufferings and feel about them as we feel about our
pleasures now. What has been suffered or lost will feel weightless
compared to the substance that has been gained.

We can expect to feel a limitless sense of 'Ah yes, now I see'. What we
longed for, reached for, touched but couldn't grasp, and knew in part
will then be so clear. And all our unfulfilled longing on this side of
death will, we can expect, enrich and fulfil the having on that side of
death. We can expect to feel as if we're waking up from being half
asleep, waking into an explosion of pure, utter gratitude as we suddenly
and fully realise all we've had and taken for granted all along.

You may imagine that dying will be like diving or falling or stepping
into a big wave at the beach. You will feel yourself lifted off your
feet and taken up into a swirl and curl and spin more powerful than you
can now imagine. But there will be no fear, because the motion and flow
will be the dance of Father, Son and Holy Spirit. The rising tide will
be life and joy. The undertow will be love, and you will be drawn deeper
and deeper in.

We normally don't look forward to the process of dying, and most of us
would be happy if the dying process is as short and painless as
possible. But if we allow the Spirit to prepare us for dying by
contemplating it in these ways, we can begin to under-stand the dual
pull that Paul wrote about: 'For me to live is Christ but to die is
gain.' On the one hand, we feel a pull to stay here in this life,
enjoying the light and love and goodness of God with so many people who
are dear to us, with so much good work left to be done. On the other
hand, we feel an equal and opposite pull towards the light and love and
goodness of God experienced more directly beyond this life.

Many of us remember the experience as children of 'waiting your turn';
Maybe it was waiting your turn to ride a pony at the county fair, or
waiting your turn to play a game, or waiting your turn to ride a sled
down a hill in winter snow. Imagine the feeling of having had your turn
on this Earth and having enjoyed it thoroughly. Now you are ready to
step aside to let someone else have their turn. In that way, even dying
can be an act of love and generosity: vacating space to make room for
others, especially generations as yet unborn, just as others vacated
their space so you could have your turn in this life. Perhaps the act of
letting others have their turn will be one of our most mature and
generous actions a fitting end to our adventure in this life. At that
moment, it will be our turn to graduate into a new adventure, beyond all
imagining.

As we walk this road, we not only remember the past, we also anticipate
the future, which is described as a great banquet around God's table of
joy. When you pass from this life, do not be afraid. You will not pass
into death. You will pass through death into a greater aliveness still
--- the banquet of God. Trust God, and live.
