---
type: document
translationKey: John's Seven Signs (1-3)
title: John's Seven Signs (1-3)
---
stirred up; while I am trying to get in, somebody else gets there
first."

**^8 ^**Jesus said to him, "Get up, pick up your mat, and
walk." **^9 ^**Immediately the man got well; he picked up his mat and
started walking.

The day this happened was a Sabbath, **^10 ^**so the Jewish authorities
told the man who had been healed, "This is a Sabbath, and it is against
our Law for you to carry your mat."

**^11 ^**He answered, "The man who made me well told me to pick up my
mat and walk."

**^12 ^**They asked him, "Who is the man who told you to do this?"

**^13 ^**But the man who had been healed did not know who Jesus was, for
there was a crowd in that place, and Jesus had slipped away.

**^14 ^**Afterward, Jesus found him in the Temple and said, "Listen, you
are well now; so stop sinning or something worse may happen to you."

**^15 ^**Then the man left and told the Jewish authorities that it was
Jesus who had healed him. **^16 ^**So they began to persecute Jesus,
because he had done this healing on a Sabbath. **^17 ^**Jesus answered
them, "My Father is always working, and I too must work."

*(Good News Translation)\
***Seven Miraculous Signs of Jesus**

Read one story every day for 1 week.

1.  What does this story say to you about people?

2.  What does this story say to you about Jesus?

3.  What does this story say about you?

4.  Who needs to hear this story?

# The First Sign: John 2:1-12 Water into wine 

Two days later there was a wedding in the town of Cana in Galilee.
Jesus\' mother was there, **^2 ^**and Jesus and his disciples had also
been invited to the wedding. **^3 ^**When the wine had given out,
Jesus\' mother said to him, "They are out of wine."

**^4 ^**"You must not tell me what to do," Jesus replied. "My time has
not yet come."

**^5 ^**Jesus\' mother then told the servants, "Do whatever he tells
you."

**^6 ^**The Jews have rules about ritual washing, and for this purpose
six stone water jars were there, each one large enough to hold between
twenty and thirty gallons. **^7 ^**Jesus said to the servants, "Fill
these jars with water." They filled them to the brim, **^8 ^**and then
he told them, "Now draw some water out and take it to the man in charge
of the feast." They took him the water, **^9 ^**which now had turned
into wine, and he tasted it. He did not know where this wine had come
from (but, of course, the servants who had drawn out the water knew); so
he called the bridegroom **^10 ^**and said to him, "Everyone else serves
the best wine first, and after the guests have drunk a lot, he serves
the ordinary wine. But you have kept the best wine until now!"

**^11 ^**Jesus performed this first miracle in Cana in Galilee; there he
revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.

**^12 ^**After this, Jesus and his mother, brothers, and disciples went
to Capernaum and stayed there a few days.

# Second Sign: John 4:46-54 Healing of official's son 

**^46 ^**Then Jesus went back to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned
the water into wine. A government official was there whose son was sick
in Capernaum. **^47 ^**When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to
Galilee, he went to him and asked him to go to Capernaum and heal his
son, who was about to die. **^48 ^**Jesus said to him, "None of you will
ever believe unless you see miracles and wonders."

**^49 ^**"Sir," replied the official, "come with me before my child
dies."

**^50 ^**Jesus said to him, "Go; your son will live!"

The man believed Jesus\' words and went. **^51 ^**On his way home his
servants met him with the news, "Your boy is going to live!"

**^52 ^**He asked them what time it was when his son got better, and
they answered, "It was one o\'clock yesterday afternoon when the fever
left him." **^53 ^**Then the father remembered that it was at that very
hour when Jesus had told him, "Your son will live." So he and all his
family believed.

**^54 ^**This was the second miracle that Jesus performed after coming
from Judea to Galilee.

# Third Sign: John 5:1-17 Healing of paralytic at pool

After this, Jesus went to Jerusalem for a religious
festival. **^2 ^**Near the Sheep Gate in Jerusalem there is a pool with
five porches; in Hebrew it is called Bethzatha. **^3 ^**A large crowd of
sick people were lying on the porches---the blind, the lame, and the
paralyzed. **^5 ^**A man was there who had been sick for thirty-eight
years. **^6 ^**Jesus saw him lying there, and he knew that the man had
been sick for such a long time; so he asked him, "Do you want to get
well?"

**^7 ^**The sick man answered, "Sir, I don\'t have anyone here to put me
in the pool when the water is
