---
title: John's Seven Signs (7)
type: document
---
**^37 ^**But some of them said, "He gave sight to the blind man, didn\'t
he? Could he not have kept Lazarus from dying?"

**^38 ^**Deeply moved once more, Jesus went to the tomb, which was a
cave with a stone placed at the entrance. **^39 ^**"Take the stone
away!" Jesus ordered.

Martha, the dead man\'s sister, answered, "There will be a bad smell,
Lord. He has been buried four days!"

**^40 ^**Jesus said to her, "Didn\'t I tell you that you would see
God\'s glory if you believed?" **^41 ^**They took the stone away. Jesus
looked up and said, "I thank you, Father, that you listen to
me. **^42 ^**I know that you always listen to me, but I say this for the
sake of the people here, so that they will believe that you sent
me." **^43 ^**After he had said this, he called out in a loud voice,
"Lazarus, come out!" **^44 ^**He came out, his hands and feet wrapped in
grave cloths, and with a cloth around his face. "Untie him," Jesus told
them, "and let him go."

**^45 ^**Many of the people who had come to visit Mary saw what Jesus
did, and they believed in him.**^46 ^**But some of them returned to the
Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.

*(Good News Translation)*\
**Seven Miraculous Signs of Jesus**

**Seventh Sign: John 11:1-46\
Raising of Lazarus**

A man named Lazarus, who lived in Bethany, became sick. Bethany was the
town where Mary and her sister Martha lived. (**^2 ^**This Mary was the
one who poured the perfume on the Lord\'s feet and wiped them with her
hair; it was her brother Lazarus who was sick.) **^3 ^**The sisters sent
Jesus a message: "Lord, your dear friend is sick."

**^4 ^**When Jesus heard it, he said, "The final result of this sickness
will not be the death of Lazarus; this has happened in order to bring
glory to God, and it will be the means by which the Son of God will
receive glory."

**^5 ^**Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. **^6 ^**Yet when
he received the news that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was for
two more days. **^7 ^**Then he said to the disciples, "Let us go back to
Judea."

**^8 ^**"Teacher," the disciples answered, "just a short time ago the
people there wanted to stone you; and are you planning to go back?"

**^9 ^**Jesus said, "A day has twelve hours, doesn\'t it? So those who
walk in broad daylight do not stumble, for they see the light of this
world. **^10 ^**But if they walk during the night they stumble, because
they have no light." **^11 ^**Jesus said this and then added, "Our
friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I will go and wake him up."

**^12 ^**The disciples answered, "If he is asleep, Lord, he will get
well."

**^13 ^**Jesus meant that Lazarus had died, but they thought he meant
natural sleep. **^14 ^**So Jesus told them plainly, "Lazarus is
dead, **^15 ^**but for your sake I am glad that I was not with him, so
that you will believe. Let us go to him."

**^16 ^**Thomas (called the Twin) said to his fellow disciples, "Let us
all go along with the Teacher, so that we may die with him!"

**^7 ^**When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been buried four
days before. **^18 ^**Bethany was less than two miles from
Jerusalem, **^19 ^**and many Judeans had come to see Martha and Mary to
comfort them about their brother\'s death.

**^20 ^**When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet
him, but Mary stayed in the house. **^21 ^**Martha said to Jesus, "If
you had been here, Lord, my brother would not have died! **^22 ^**But I
know that even now God will give you whatever you ask him for."

**^23 ^**"Your brother will rise to life," Jesus told her.

**^24 ^**"I know," she replied, "that he will rise to life on the last
day."

**^25 ^**Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. Those
who believe in me will live, even though they die; **^26 ^**and those
who live and believe in me will never die. Do you believe this?"

**^27 ^**"Yes, Lord!" she answered. "I do believe that you are the
Messiah, the Son of God, who was to come into the world."

**^28 ^**After Martha said this, she went back and called her sister
Mary privately. "The Teacher is here," she told her, "and is asking for
you." **^29 ^**When Mary heard this, she got up and hurried out to meet
him. (**^30 ^**Jesus had not yet arrived in the village, but was still
in the place where Martha had met him.)**^31 ^**The people who were in
the house with Mary comforting her followed her when they saw her get up
and hurry out. They thought that she was going to the grave to weep
there.

**^32 ^**Mary arrived where Jesus was, and as soon as she saw him, she
fell at his feet. "Lord," she said, "if you had been here, my brother
would not have died!"

**^33 ^**Jesus saw her weeping, and he saw how the people with her were
weeping also; his heart was touched, and he was deeply
moved. **^34 ^**"Where have you buried him?" he asked them.

"Come and see, Lord," they answered.

**^35 ^**Jesus wept. **^36 ^**"See how much he loved him!" the people
said.
