---
title: John's Seven Signs (6)
translationKey: John's Seven Signs (6)
type: document
---
**^31 ^**We know that God does not listen to sinners; he does listen to
people who respect him and do what he wants them to do. **^32 ^**Since
the beginning of the world nobody has ever heard of anyone giving sight
to a person born blind. **^33 ^**Unless this man came from God, he would
not be able to do a thing."

**^34 ^**They answered, "You were born and brought up in sin---and you
are trying to teach us?" And they expelled him from the synagogue.

**^35 ^**When Jesus heard what had happened, he found the man and asked
him, "Do you believe in the Son of Man?"

**^36 ^**The man answered, "Tell me who he is, sir, so that I can
believe in him!"

**^37 ^**Jesus said to him, "You have already seen him, and he is the
one who is talking with you now."

**^38 ^**"I believe, Lord!" the man said, and knelt down before Jesus.

**^39 ^**Jesus said, "I came to this world to judge, so that the blind
should see and those who see should become blind."

**^40 ^**Some Pharisees who were there with him heard him say this and
asked him, "Surely you don\'t mean that we are blind, too?"

**^41 ^**Jesus answered, "If you were blind, then you would not be
guilty; but since you claim that you can see, this means that you are
still guilty."

# 

# *(Good News Translation)* Seven Miraculous Signs of Jesus

# Sixth Sign: John 9:1-41 Healing of man born blind

As Jesus was walking along, he saw a man who had been born
blind. **^2 ^**His disciples asked him, "Teacher, whose sin caused him
to be born blind? Was it his own or his parents\' sin?"

**^3 ^**Jesus answered, "His blindness has nothing to do with his sins
or his parents\' sins. He is blind so that God\'s power might be seen at
work in him. **^4 ^**As long as it is day, we must do the work of him
who sent me; night is coming when no one can work. **^5 ^**While I am in
the world, I am the light for the world."

**^6 ^**After he said this, Jesus spat on the ground and made some mud
with the spittle; he rubbed the mud on the man\'s eyes **^7 ^**and told
him, "Go and wash your face in the Pool of Siloam." (This name means
"Sent.") So the man went, washed his face, and came back seeing.

**^8 ^**His neighbours, then, and the people who had seen him begging
before this, asked, "Isn\'t this the man who used to sit and beg?"

**^9 ^**Some said, "He is the one," but others said, "No he isn\'t; he
just looks like him."

So the man himself said, "I am the man."

**^10 ^**"How is it that you can now see?" they asked him.

**^11 ^**He answered, "The man called Jesus made some mud, rubbed it on
my eyes, and told me to go to Siloam and wash my face. So I went, and as
soon as I washed, I could see."

**^12 ^**"Where is he?" they asked.

"I don\'t know," he answered.

**^13 ^**Then they took to the Pharisees the man who had been
blind. **^14 ^**The day that Jesus made the mud and cured him of his
blindness was a Sabbath. **^15 ^**The Pharisees, then, asked the man
again how he had received his sight. He told them, "He put some mud on
my eyes; I washed my face, and now I can see."

**^16 ^**Some of the Pharisees said, "The man who did this cannot be
from God, for he does not obey the Sabbath law."

Others, however, said, "How could a man who is a sinner perform such
miracles as these?" And there was a division among them.

**^17 ^**So the Pharisees asked the man once more, "You say he cured you
of your blindness---well, what do you say about him?"

"He is a prophet," the man answered.

**^18 ^**The Jewish authorities, however, were not willing to believe
that he had been blind and could now see, until they called his
parents **^19 ^**and asked them, "Is this your son? You say that he was
born blind; how is it, then, that he can now see?"

**^20 ^**His parents answered, "We know that he is our son, and we know
that he was born blind. **^21 ^**But we do not know how it is that he is
now able to see, nor do we know who cured him of his blindness. Ask him;
he is old enough, and he can answer for himself!" **^22 ^**His parents
said this because they were afraid of the Jewish authorities, who had
already agreed that anyone who said he believed that Jesus was the
Messiah would be expelled from the synagogue. **^23 ^**That is why his
parents said, "He is old enough; ask him!"

**^24 ^**A second time they called back the man who had been born blind,
and said to him, "Promise before God that you will tell the truth! We
know that this man who cured you is a sinner."

**^25 ^**"I do not know if he is a sinner or not," the man replied. "One
thing I do know: I was blind, and now I see."

**^26 ^**"What did he do to you?" they asked. "How did he cure you of
your blindness?"

**^27 ^**"I have already told you," he answered, "and you would not
listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Maybe you, too, would like to
be his disciples?"

**^28 ^**They insulted him and said, "You are that fellow\'s disciple;
but we are Moses\' disciples. **^29 ^**We know that God spoke to Moses;
as for that fellow, however, we do not even know where he comes from!"

**^30 ^**The man answered, "What a strange thing that is! You do not
know where he comes from, but he cured me of my blindness! 
