---
title: John's Seven Signs
translationKey: John's Seven Signs
type: document
---
Read one story every day for 1 wk.

1.  What does this story say to you about people?

2.  What does this story say to you about Jesus?

3.  What does this story say about you?

4.  Who needs to hear this story?

# The First Sign: John 2:1-12 Water into wine 

Two days later there was a wedding in the town of Cana in Galilee.
Jesus\' mother was there, **^2 ^**and Jesus and his disciples had also
been invited to the wedding. **^3 ^**When the wine had given out,
Jesus\' mother said to him, "They are out of wine."

**^4 ^**"You must not tell me what to do," Jesus replied. "My time has
not yet come."

**^5 ^**Jesus\' mother then told the servants, "Do whatever he tells
you."

**^6 ^**The Jews have rules about ritual washing, and for this purpose
six stone water jars were there, each one large enough to hold between
twenty and thirty gallons. **^7 ^**Jesus said to the servants, "Fill
these jars with water." They filled them to the brim, **^8 ^**and then
he told them, "Now draw some water out and take it to the man in charge
of the feast." They took him the water, **^9 ^**which now had turned
into wine, and he tasted it. He did not know where this wine had come
from (but, of course, the servants who had drawn out the water knew); so
he called the bridegroom **^10 ^**and said to him, "Everyone else serves
the best wine first, and after the guests have drunk a lot, he serves
the ordinary wine. But you have kept the best wine until now!"

**^11 ^**Jesus performed this first miracle in Cana in Galilee; there he
revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.

**^12 ^**After this, Jesus and his mother, brothers, and disciples went
to Capernaum and stayed there a few days.

# Second Sign: John 4:46-54 Healing of official's son 

**^46 ^**Then Jesus went back to Cana in Galilee, where he had turned
the water into wine. A government official was there whose son was sick
in Capernaum. **^47 ^**When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to
Galilee, he went to him and asked him to go to Capernaum and heal his
son, who was about to die. **^48 ^**Jesus said to him, "None of you will
ever believe unless you see miracles and wonders."

**^49 ^**"Sir," replied the official, "come with me before my child
dies."

**^50 ^**Jesus said to him, "Go; your son will live!"

The man believed Jesus\' words and went. **^51 ^**On his way home his
servants met him with the news, "Your boy is going to live!"

**^52 ^**He asked them what time it was when his son got better, and
they answered, "It was one o\'clock yesterday afternoon when the fever
left him." **^53 ^**Then the father remembered that it was at that very
hour when Jesus had told him, "Your son will live." So he and all his
family believed.

**^54 ^**This was the second miracle that Jesus performed after coming
from Judea to Galilee.

# Third Sign: John 5:1-17 Healing of paralytic at pool

After this, Jesus went to Jerusalem for a religious
festival. **^2 ^**Near the Sheep Gate in Jerusalem there is a pool with
five porches; in Hebrew it is called Bethzatha. **^3 ^**A large crowd of
sick people were lying on the porches---the blind, the lame, and the
paralyzed. **^5 ^**A man was there who had been sick for thirty-eight
years. **^6 ^**Jesus saw him lying there, and he knew that the man had
been sick for such a long time; so he asked him, "Do you want to get
well?"

**^7 ^**The sick man answered, "Sir, I don\'t have anyone here to put me
in the pool when the water is stirred up; while I am trying to get in,
somebody else gets there first."

**^8 ^**Jesus said to him, "Get up, pick up your mat, and
walk." **^9 ^**Immediately the man got well; he picked up his mat and
started walking.

The day this happened was a Sabbath, **^10 ^**so the Jewish authorities
told the man who had been healed, "This is a Sabbath, and it is against
our Law for you to carry your mat."

**^11 ^**He answered, "The man who made me well told me to pick up my
mat and walk."

**^12 ^**They asked him, "Who is the man who told you to do this?"

**^13 ^**But the man who had been healed did not know who Jesus was, for
there was a crowd in that place, and Jesus had slipped away.

**^14 ^**Afterward, Jesus found him in the Temple and said, "Listen, you
are well now; so stop sinning or something worse may happen to you."

**^15 ^**Then the man left and told the Jewish authorities that it was
Jesus who had healed him. **^16 ^**So they began to persecute Jesus,
because he had done this healing on a Sabbath. **^17 ^**Jesus answered
them, "My Father is always working, and I too must work."

Read one story every day for 1 wk.

5.  What does this story say to you about people?

6.  What does this story say to you about Jesus?

7.  What does this story say about you?

8.  Who needs to hear this story?

# Fourth Sign: John 6:1-14 Jesus feeds five thousand

After this, Jesus went across Lake Galilee (or, Lake Tiberias, as it is
also called). **^2 ^**A large crowd followed him, because they had seen
his miracles of healing the sick. **^3 ^**Jesus went up a hill and sat
down with his disciples. **^4 ^**The time for the Passover Festival was
near. **^5 ^**Jesus looked around and saw that a large crowd was coming
to him, so he asked Philip, "Where can we buy enough food to feed all
these people?" (**^6 ^**He said this to test Philip; actually he already
knew what he would do.)

**^7 ^**Philip answered, "For everyone to have even a little, it would
take more than two hundred silver coins to buy enough bread."

**^8 ^**Another one of his disciples, Andrew, who was Simon Peter\'s
brother, said, **^9 ^**"There is a boy here who has five loaves of
barley bread and two fish. But they will certainly not be enough for all
these people."

**^10 ^**"Make the people sit down," Jesus told them. (There was a lot
of grass there.) So all the people sat down; there were about five
thousand men. **^11 ^**Jesus took the bread, gave thanks to God, and
distributed it to the people who were sitting there. He did the same
with the fish, and they all had as much as they wanted. **^12 ^**When
they were all full, he said to his disciples, "Gather the pieces left
over; let us not waste a bit." **^13 ^**So they gathered them all and
filled twelve baskets with the pieces left over from the five barley
loaves which the people had eaten.

**^14 ^**Seeing this miracle that Jesus had performed, the people there
said, "Surely this is the Prophet who was to come into the world!"

# Fifth Sign: John 6:15-25 Jesus walks on the water

**^15 ^**Jesus knew that they were about to come and seize him in order
to make him king by force; so he went off again to the hills by himself.

**^16 ^**When evening came, Jesus\' disciples went down to the
lake, **^17 ^**got into a boat, and went back across the lake toward
Capernaum. Night came on, and Jesus still had not come to
them. **^18 ^**By then a strong wind was blowing and stirring up the
water. **^19 ^**The disciples had rowed about three or four miles when
they saw Jesus walking on the water, coming near the boat, and they were
terrified.**^20 ^**"Don\'t be afraid," Jesus told them, "it is
I!" **^21 ^**Then they willingly took him into the boat, and immediately
the boat reached land at the place they were heading for.

**^22 ^**Next day the crowd which had stayed on the other side of the
lake realized that there had been only one boat there. They knew that
Jesus had not gone in it with his disciples, but that they had left
without him. **^23 ^**Other boats, which were from Tiberias, came to
shore near the place where the crowd had eaten the bread after the Lord
had given thanks. **^24 ^**When the crowd saw that Jesus was not there,
nor his disciples, they got into those boats and went to Capernaum,
looking for him.

**^25 ^**When the people found Jesus on the other side of the lake, they
said to him, "Teacher, when did you get here?"

#  Sixth Sign: John 9:1-41 Healing of man born blind

As Jesus was walking along, he saw a man who had been born
blind. **^2 ^**His disciples asked him, "Teacher, whose sin caused him
to be born blind? Was it his own or his parents\' sin?"

**^3 ^**Jesus answered, "His blindness has nothing to do with his sins
or his parents\' sins. He is blind so that God\'s power might be seen at
work in him. **^4 ^**As long as it is day, we must do the work of him
who sent me; night is coming when no one can work. **^5 ^**While I am in
the world, I am the light for the world."

**^6 ^**After he said this, Jesus spat on the ground and made some mud
with the spittle; he rubbed the mud on the man\'s eyes **^7 ^**and told
him, "Go and wash your face in the Pool of Siloam." (This name means
"Sent.") So the man went, washed his face, and came back seeing.

**^8 ^**His neighbors, then, and the people who had seen him begging
before this, asked, "Isn\'t this the man who used to sit and beg?"

**^9 ^**Some said, "He is the one," but others said, "No he isn\'t; he
just looks like him."

So the man himself said, "I am the man."

**^10 ^**"How is it that you can now see?" they asked him.

**^11 ^**He answered, "The man called Jesus made some mud, rubbed it on
my eyes, and told me to go to Siloam and wash my face. So I went, and as
soon as I washed, I could see."

**^12 ^**"Where is he?" they asked.

"I don\'t know," he answered.

**^13 ^**Then they took to the Pharisees the man who had been
blind. **^14 ^**The day that Jesus made the mud and cured him of his
blindness was a Sabbath. **^15 ^**The Pharisees, then, asked the man
again how he had received his sight. He told them, "He put some mud on
my eyes; I washed my face, and now I can see."

**^16 ^**Some of the Pharisees said, "The man who did this cannot be
from God, for he does not obey the Sabbath law."

Others, however, said, "How could a man who is a sinner perform such
miracles as these?" And there was a division among them.

**^17 ^**So the Pharisees asked the man once more, "You say he cured you
of your blindness---well, what do you say about him?"

"He is a prophet," the man answered.

**^18 ^**The Jewish authorities, however, were not willing to believe
that he had been blind and could now see, until they called his
parents **^19 ^**and asked them, "Is this your son? You say that he was
born blind; how is it, then, that he can now see?"

**^20 ^**His parents answered, "We know that he is our son, and we know
that he was born blind. **^21 ^**But we do not know how it is that he is
now able to see, nor do we know who cured him of his blindness. Ask him;
he is old enough, and he can answer for himself!" **^22 ^**His parents
said this because they were afraid of the Jewish authorities, who had
already agreed that anyone who said he believed that Jesus was the
Messiah would be expelled from the synagogue. **^23 ^**That is why his
parents said, "He is old enough; ask him!"

**^24 ^**A second time they called back the man who had been born blind,
and said to him, "Promise before God that you will tell the truth! We
know that this man who cured you is a sinner."

**^25 ^**"I do not know if he is a sinner or not," the man replied. "One
thing I do know: I was blind, and now I see."

**^26 ^**"What did he do to you?" they asked. "How did he cure you of
your blindness?"

**^27 ^**"I have already told you," he answered, "and you would not
listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Maybe you, too, would like to
be his disciples?"

**^28 ^**They insulted him and said, "You are that fellow\'s disciple;
but we are Moses\' disciples. **^29 ^**We know that God spoke to Moses;
as for that fellow, however, we do not even know where he comes from!"

**^30 ^**The man answered, "What a strange thing that is! You do not
know where he comes from, but he cured me of my blindness! **^31 ^**We
know that God does not listen to sinners; he does listen to people who
respect him and do what he wants them to do. **^32 ^**Since the
beginning of the world nobody has ever heard of anyone giving sight to a
person born blind. **^33 ^**Unless this man came from God, he would not
be able to do a thing."

**^34 ^**They answered, "You were born and brought up in sin---and you
are trying to teach us?" And they expelled him from the synagogue.

**^35 ^**When Jesus heard what had happened, he found the man and asked
him, "Do you believe in the Son of Man?"

**^36 ^**The man answered, "Tell me who he is, sir, so that I can
believe in him!"

**^37 ^**Jesus said to him, "You have already seen him, and he is the
one who is talking with you now."

**^38 ^**"I believe, Lord!" the man said, and knelt down before Jesus.

**^39 ^**Jesus said, "I came to this world to judge, so that the blind
should see and those who see should become blind."

**^40 ^**Some Pharisees who were there with him heard him say this and
asked him, "Surely you don\'t mean that we are blind, too?"

**^41 ^**Jesus answered, "If you were blind, then you would not be
guilty; but since you claim that you can see, this means that you are
still guilty."

# Seventh Sign: John 11:1-46 Raising of Lazarus

A man named Lazarus, who lived in Bethany, became sick. Bethany was the
town where Mary and her sister Martha lived. (**^2 ^**This Mary was the
one who poured the perfume on the Lord\'s feet and wiped them with her
hair; it was her brother Lazarus who was sick.) **^3 ^**The sisters sent
Jesus a message: "Lord, your dear friend is sick."

**^4 ^**When Jesus heard it, he said, "The final result of this sickness
will not be the death of Lazarus; this has happened in order to bring
glory to God, and it will be the means by which the Son of God will
receive glory."

**^5 ^**Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. **^6 ^**Yet when
he received the news that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was for
two more days. **^7 ^**Then he said to the disciples, "Let us go back to
Judea."

**^8 ^**"Teacher," the disciples answered, "just a short time ago the
people there wanted to stone you; and are you planning to go back?"

**^9 ^**Jesus said, "A day has twelve hours, doesn\'t it? So those who
walk in broad daylight do not stumble, for they see the light of this
world. **^10 ^**But if they walk during the night they stumble, because
they have no light." **^11 ^**Jesus said this and then added, "Our
friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I will go and wake him up."

**^12 ^**The disciples answered, "If he is asleep, Lord, he will get
well."

**^13 ^**Jesus meant that Lazarus had died, but they thought he meant
natural sleep. **^14 ^**So Jesus told them plainly, "Lazarus is
dead, **^15 ^**but for your sake I am glad that I was not with him, so
that you will believe. Let us go to him."

**^16 ^**Thomas (called the Twin) said to his fellow disciples, "Let us
all go along with the Teacher, so that we may die with him!"

**^7 ^**When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been buried four
days before. **^18 ^**Bethany was less than two miles from
Jerusalem, **^19 ^**and many Judeans had come to see Martha and Mary to
comfort them about their brother\'s death.

**^20 ^**When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet
him, but Mary stayed in the house. **^21 ^**Martha said to Jesus, "If
you had been here, Lord, my brother would not have died! **^22 ^**But I
know that even now God will give you whatever you ask him for."

**^23 ^**"Your brother will rise to life," Jesus told her.

**^24 ^**"I know," she replied, "that he will rise to life on the last
day."

**^25 ^**Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. Those
who believe in me will live, even though they die; **^26 ^**and those
who live and believe in me will never die. Do you believe this?"

**^27 ^**"Yes, Lord!" she answered. "I do believe that you are the
Messiah, the Son of God, who was to come into the world."

**^28 ^**After Martha said this, she went back and called her sister
Mary privately. "The Teacher is here," she told her, "and is asking for
you." **^29 ^**When Mary heard this, she got up and hurried out to meet
him. (**^30 ^**Jesus had not yet arrived in the village, but was still
in the place where Martha had met him.)**^31 ^**The people who were in
the house with Mary comforting her followed her when they saw her get up
and hurry out. They thought that she was going to the grave to weep
there.

**^32 ^**Mary arrived where Jesus was, and as soon as she saw him, she
fell at his feet. "Lord," she said, "if you had been here, my brother
would not have died!"

**^33 ^**Jesus saw her weeping, and he saw how the people with her were
weeping also; his heart was touched, and he was deeply
moved. **^34 ^**"Where have you buried him?" he asked them.

"Come and see, Lord," they answered.

**^35 ^**Jesus wept. **^36 ^**"See how much he loved him!" the people
said.

**^37 ^**But some of them said, "He gave sight to the blind man, didn\'t
he? Could he not have kept Lazarus from dying?"

**^38 ^**Deeply moved once more, Jesus went to the tomb, which was a
cave with a stone placed at the entrance. **^39 ^**"Take the stone
away!" Jesus ordered.

Martha, the dead man\'s sister, answered, "There will be a bad smell,
Lord. He has been buried four days!"

**^40 ^**Jesus said to her, "Didn\'t I tell you that you would see
God\'s glory if you believed?" **^41 ^**They took the stone away. Jesus
looked up and said, "I thank you, Father, that you listen to
me. **^42 ^**I know that you always listen to me, but I say this for the
sake of the people here, so that they will believe that you sent
me." **^43 ^**After he had said this, he called out in a loud voice,
"Lazarus, come out!" **^44 ^**He came out, his hands and feet wrapped in
grave cloths, and with a cloth around his face. "Untie him," Jesus told
them, "and let him go."

**^45 ^**Many of the people who had come to visit Mary saw what Jesus
did, and they believed in him.**^46 ^**But some of them returned to the
Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
