---
title: Apostolic Authority
type: document
---
Author. [[Andrew
Wilson]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/theology/contributors/21) \|
Publication Date. 31/10/2012

**I believe in apostles today. I affirm the uniqueness of the Apostles
(capital A) who witnessed the risen Jesus -- the twelve, Paul, James,
and possibly one or two others -- and of course affirm that nobody today
can write Scripture. But I also affirm that there were apostles (lower
case a) who, like Apollos and a number of others, had an apostolic gift
and ministry without having seen the risen Jesus for themselves (compare
1 Cor 4:1-13 with Acts 18:24-28). Since I don't see any exegetical
reason to suppose this type of ministry ceased in the first generation,
I am led to expect apostles (as opposed to Apostles) continuing today.**

The problem is, however, that the vast majority of references to
A/apostles and A/apostolic ministry involve Apostles (primarily Paul,
Peter, James and John), as opposed to apostles (like Apollos, Barnabas,
probably Silas, and possibly Timothy). So, if we are looking for
guidance as to how apostles should function today, we face an exegetical
challenge. When Paul is speaking about his own ministry, how can we tell
whether he is speaking as an Apostle or an apostle? Following on from
this, how can we tell whether modern day apostles can, or should,
appropriate Paul's words to refer to their own ministries? For example:\
\
1. Should we expect modern day apostles to be present in spirit when
church discipline is conducted in a local church (1 Cor 5:4; cf. 1 Tim
1:20)?\
2. Is it appropriate for modern day apostles to define their gospel,
along the lines of Paul's "my gospel" (Rom 2:16; 16:25; 2 Tim 2:8), and
to charge those who disagree with them not to teach otherwise (1 Tim 1:3
et al)?\
3. Should modern apostolic ministry involve going to unreached people
groups (Rom 15:8-21)? Is it sub-apostolic if it doesn't?\
4. Ought modern apostles and prophets to see themselves as the
foundation of the church (Eph 2:20; cf. Eph 3:4-5), and live and serve
accordingly?\
5. Are modern apostles responsible for laying foundations in churches,
accountable directly to God for their labour, and authenticated in their
ministry by vilification and suffering (1 Cor 3:1-4:13; 2 Cor 6:3-10)?\
6. Can modern apostles command individuals to do them personal favours
(Phm 8)?\
7. Can a modern apostle speak directly to a local church to correct
inaccurate theology, without going through the elders (Galatians, 1
Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Colossians, etc)?\
\
Much of this, and certainly 1, 2, 4, 6 and 7, relates to the question of
apostolic authority, which is an important issue for those of us who
believe in apostles today. Paul, as an Apostle, clearly had Apostolic
authority to define the gospel (\#2), establish theological,
ecclesiological and kerygmatic foundations (\#4) and ensure they were
preserved (\#7), instruct individual believers (\#6) and discipline the
church if necessary (\#1), with or without the agreement of the local
church elders. But what about modern apostles? Do they have apostolic
authority in the same sense? And if not, how does it work?\
\
The whole topic has massive practical implications. Were someone to
answer positively to all seven of these questions, they would
effectively be blurring altogether the line between Apostles and
apostles; even if they were to maintain that modern apostles could not
write the Bible, they would nonetheless be arguing for almost
unchallenged authority for modern apostles, with the apostle's
interpretation of Scripture the defining source of doctrine amongst the
churches for which he was responsible. On the other hand, if someone
were to answer negatively to all seven, then the case for there being
such a thing as a modern apostle in the first place would practically
disappear; if an apostle does not do any of the above things, then it is
hard to see how they are any different from an itinerant evangelist or
church planter. It's not straightforward.\
\
Despite the implications, however, the issue has not always been
thoroughly thought through. (Have compassion on people learning English,
by the way: that's three consecutive words with "ough" in them,
pronounced differently each time.) Many books on apostles today have
commandeered every reference to an *apostolos* in the New Testament,
without making clear on what basis they believe each text should be
applied to contemporary apostles. Other writers, more sceptical of
apostolic ministry today, have dismissed all descriptions of New
Testament apostleship as being unique to the first century. Meanwhile,
many thoughtful practitioners, including Terry Virgo, David Devenish,
and others in the Newfrontiers family, have lived out an exemplary
middle ground between these two extremes -- but an exegetical and
hermeneutical explanation of which texts apply directly to apostles
today and which texts don't, and of how we may establish the nature and
limits of apostolic authority today, has not yet (to my knowledge) been
provided. Hence this post.\
\
I propose the following starting point for the conversation. There are
several texts in the New Testament in which it is clear that apostles
are in view, and not just Apostles, because they contain references to
those who did not witness the risen Christ. 1 Corinthians 3:5-4:13 is a
clear example, because it uses the phrase "us apostles" (4:8) of Paul
and Apollos. 1 Thessalonians 1-3 refers to Paul, Silvanus and Timothy as
"apostles of Christ" (2:6), which indicates that the things Paul says
about apostolic ministry in these chapters cannot be limited to
eyewitnesses of the resurrection (we have no evidence that
Silas/Silvanus witnessed the resurrection, and we know that Timothy was
not even converted until many years later). Paul's extended discourse on
the ministry of the new covenant in 2 Corinthians 1-7 is almost entirely
spoken in the first person plural, including Timothy and possibly
Silvanus as well; although it does not use the word "apostles" in these
chapters, 3:1-3 strongly implies that Paul is thinking that way. And
although it is impossible to be certain, there are good reasons for
thinking that Barnabas did not witness the resurrection -- his
introduction in Acts 4:36 makes it very likely that he was not regarded
as an Apostle at this point -- but emerged as an apostle after being
sent out from Antioch (14:4, 14). This means that 1 Corinthians 9:4-14,
as well as the narrative passages about him in Acts (13:4-14:28), can
also be considered as applying to apostles, and not just Apostles. Taken
together, that is a substantial group of texts (Acts 13:4-14:28; 1 Cor
3:5-4:13; 9:4-14; 2 Cor 1-7; 1 Thess 1-3) that shed massive light on
what apostles who had not witnessed the resurrection did, and
consequently might be expected to do today.\
\
Now look at it the other way round. There are other passages in which it
seems clear, or at least likely, that Paul is speaking, not of apostolic
ministry in general, but of his (or, occasionally, others') unique
Apostolic ministry as eyewitness of the resurrected Christ, with the
corresponding role of instructing the church in the very foundations of
the gospel and Christian doctrine. So, in Galatians, Paul begins with an
affirmation that he did not receive the gospel from man but directly
from Jesus Christ (1:12), and this becomes the basis for an extended
tirade against the Galatians (who are called "foolish" and "bewitched"),
false teachers (who are considered accursed and encouraged to castrate
themselves), and even the apostle Peter (who is spoken of more
courteously, but still said to have been "clearly in the wrong"). Paul's
unique experience of receiving his gospel directly from Jesus gives him
licence to correct others in ways that Apollos and Silvanus, we may
assume, did not (and this surely also applies to his use of the phrase
"my gospel" in Romans and 2 Timothy). Similarly, in other texts, Paul
assumes that the Apostles had a unique role in salvation history: to
witness to the resurrection (1 Cor 15:1-11), and, along with the
prophets, to make plain the mystery of the gospel to the nations (Eph
3:1-6), which in context is probably what is meant by being the
foundation of the church (Eph 2:20). It is this conviction -- that Paul,
along with the other Apostles, has been entrusted with the gospel of God
by the risen Christ, and that it is to be preached and guarded at all
costs -- which prompts Paul to define the gospel in such detail in
Romans, and to urge its preservation with such vigour in the Pastoral
Epistles (1 Tim 1:11; 2:7; 6:13-16, 20-21; 2 Tim 1:8-14; 2:2, 8; Tit
1:1-3). I imagine no readers of this article will dispute that the
equivalent of this, in the church today, is the preservation of the
gospel and doctrines of the Apostles, in Scripture, not the gospel and
doctrines of a modern apostle.\
\
These two groups of texts -- the ones that unambiguously refer to
apostles in the broader sense, and the ones that unambiguously don't --
actually represent a sizeable amount of the relevant New Testament
material on A/apostleship. In the first group, Paul, Apollos, Barnabas,
Silas and Timothy exercise authority out of their relationship in the
gospel; in the second group, Paul exercises authority based on his
revelation of the gospel. The difference is significant. In the former
case, it grows from a church's voluntary submission to the apostle,
because the apostle has fathered the church by preaching and embodying
the gospel to the people. In the latter case, the authority transcends
gospel relationship: it is gospel revelation, and as such Paul's gospel
is right, and the Judaizers' gospel is wrong, whether they "receive his
Apostolic input" or not.\
\
From here, I suggest, it is possible to make inferences about the
handful of remaining passages in the New Testament which shape our
theology of A/apostleship, but remain ambiguous with regard to whether
Paul is functioning as an Apostle or an apostle (e.g. Acts 20:17-38; 1
Cor 4:15-21; Rom 15:14-25; 2 Cor 10:1-18; 12:12; Eph 4:11-16). For what
it may be worth, I see Paul as speaking as an apostle in Acts 20 and 1
Corinthians 4 (because the passages are grounded in his relationship to
the church through gospel ministry), as well as in 2 Corinthians 10
(because of the plural pronouns, authorship and the reference back to
"letters of commendation" from chapter 3); I think Romans 15 is Paul
speaking with a specific ambition and vocation, which need not be
prescriptive for all A/apostles, then or now; and I'm not sure about 2
Corinthians 12:12 or Ephesians 4:11-16. The upshot of all this is that,
if asked the seven questions I posed at the beginning, I would answer
"yes" to \#5 and \#6, "sometimes" to \#3, and "no" to \#1, \#2, \#4 and
\#7. Just in case you were curious.\
\
So, in a nutshell: there are apostles today; they are different from
Apostles like Paul, James and Peter in a number of ways; they cannot
write Scripture; they do function with apostolic authority; but it is an
authority grounded in relationship through the gospel -- that is, seeing
disciples and churches come into being through their proclamation of the
gospel -- rather than the once-for-all revelation of the gospel which
came to Paul and the eyewitnesses to the resurrection.\
\
And that means: even though we've got epistles, we still need apostles.

![Andrew Wilson Photo](media/image1.png){width="0.5215277777777778in"
height="0.48680555555555555in"}

**Church: **King\'s Church Eastbourne\
**Church
Website: **[[http://www.kingschurch.eu]{.ul}](http://www.kingschurch.eu/) 

-   [[Like
    this]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-how-does-it-work)

-   [[Share
    this]{.ul} ](http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=newfrontiers)

Top of Form

Unfortunately we are temporarily unable to moderate comments, so only
comments from verified users will appear. Please [[sign
in]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-how-does-it-work) (you
can create an account at the top right of this page) or log in with
Facebook to be able to have your say. Thank you. We apologise for this
inconvenience.

Sign in with your facebook account by clicking the button below.

[[Login to comment with
Facebook]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-how-does-it-work)

Bottom of Form

-   ![Dan Hayter Photo](media/image2.jpeg){width="0.40902777777777777in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Dan Hayter** on *31/10/2012 at 09:16*

Excellent post Andrew.

I'm not convinced that apostles don't have the authority to correct bad
doctrine without going through the elders, if this is needed. It seems
that using Gal 1:12 only proves that Paul had a special revelation of
the Gospel in his Apostolic commission (this use of lower-case and
upper-case is hard to make consistent :P). However, Timothy, although
taking his cue from Paul, is commanded to rebuke and correct. I see no
suggestion that he has to go through the elders for this. I realise we
can argue that he is deriving his authority from Paul, but the fact is:
Timothy is an apostle, not an Apostle and he is simply told to rebuke;
not rebuke on behalf of Paul. Isn't it a bit of an argument from silence
to say apostles have no authority to directly correct doctrine in local
churches, based on Gal 1:12?

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *31/10/2012 at 09:26*

\@Dan: Timothy was an elder, methinks (1 Tim 4:14; cf. 5:22, where the
meaning of "laying on of hands" is to do with eldership), and it is
certainly impossible to say he wasn't, so I don't think he works as an
example.

-   ![Default user
    Photo](media/image4.jpeg){width="0.5215277777777778in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By [**[Sam
Isaacson]{.ul}**](http://samisaacson.wordpress.com/) on *31/10/2012 at
10:30*

Hi Andrew

Thanks for posting on this - I don't think I've ever had any proper
teaching on the apostolic, so I'm probably a bit behind the curve on
this one...but I'm a bit confused!

I've heard others talk about the difference between Apostles and
apostles, but don't know of an argument from Scripture as to why there's
a difference...is there one? Or is the 'A' simply a respectful nod to
the founding fathers?

-   

By [**[Graham
Clark]{.ul}**](http://www.facebook.com/BiggestG) on *31/10/2012 at
10:31*

I feel its probably worth pointing out that David Devenish has recently
started a blog where he's currently putting up some of his thoughts on
apostles today which you can find
here:[[http://catalystnetwork.org/blog/tag/apostles/]{.ul}](http://catalystnetwork.org/blog/tag/apostles/)

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *31/10/2012 at 11:33*

\@Sam: the main difference is that the twelve, Paul and James witnessed
the risen Christ and received their commission from him directly (Acts
1; 1 Cor 9:1-2; 15:1-11).\
\@Graham: then you'll be pleased to know that David is posting here on
the subject tomorrow!

-   ![Dave Trigg Photo](media/image5.jpeg){width="0.5479166666666667in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Dave Trigg** on *31/10/2012 at 11:50*

What evidence do we have from church history that the term apostle
continued to be used after the first Apostles died out? It would be very
interesting to see how the role of the apostle functioned during the
ante-nicene age and how the church fathers answered your seven
questions.

Personally I find the issue rather divisive. I don't deny that there are
people with 'apostolic giftings' today but you generally find they are
called bishops or overseers etc. The use of the term apostle is pretty
unhelpful and from my experience has led to a lot of confusion and
distracting arguments that seem to do more harm than good. It also
doesn't help that there are many loons running around in
hyper-pentecostal / charismaniac circles claiming the title of Apostle
for themselves (New Apostolic Reformation anyone? Rev 2:2).

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *31/10/2012 at 12:08*

\@Dave: Didache 11 is a good place to start. And the fact that something
is controversial or open to distortion should not stop us from teaching
it, surely, or else we'd have no trinity, hypostatic union, doctrines of
grace, communion, baptism, etc!

-   ![Dan Hayter Photo](media/image2.jpeg){width="0.40902777777777777in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Dan Hayter** on *31/10/2012 at 13:53*

\@Andrew: Ok, what about Titus? He was charged to appoint elders and is
told to rebuke with "all authority" (2:15). If he's not functioning as
an apostle (or apostolic delegate, but he still caries authority to
rebuke) I don't know what we would call him.

I suppose a practical problem is that if apostles don't have a God-given
right to come into church situations without consorting with the elders,
what happens when a church's leadership falls into gross immorality and
refuses to have an apostle come to help? Practical rather than
theological I know, but it seems to fit in with Titus' commission.

-   ![Default user
    Photo](media/image4.jpeg){width="0.5215277777777778in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew price** on *31/10/2012 at 14:51*

I think you're stretching things saying timothy was an apostle why would
Paul seemingly exclude him in Col 1:1. Also why have apostles been
absent for the best part of church history? Would you have called Wesley
an apostle? Thanks for your thoughts

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *31/10/2012 at 15:50*

\@Dan: I agree Titus has that authority, but the whole point is that
there aren't any elders there! Your practical question is more tricky,
though (although it would require all the elders to be in immorality,
which is hopefully exceedingly unlikely!)\
\@Andrew: Timothy is the least certain, but I say it on the basis of 1
Thess 2; Apollos is absolutely clear, and Barnabas and Silas aren't far
behind. As for church history: wouldn't Luther have said the same about
justification by faith alone? Wouldn't the Anabaptists have said it
about believers baptism? Pentecostals about charismatic gifts? Church
history involves a lot of mistakes :)

-   ![Default user
    Photo](media/image4.jpeg){width="0.5215277777777778in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Josh Naylor** on *31/10/2012 at 16:25*

Great thoughtful post.

I'd like to pick up on the big A little a point a bit further. I too
admit to seeing no scriptural basis for the difference.

I think many modern day apostles would say they have received a
commission from Christ following a supernatural encounter rather than
feeling they have a knack for it. After all Christ gave apostles, he
didn't give some people gifts, he gave some gifts (the apostles) to
people (the church). Sometimes we confuse the gifts Christ gave with the
gifts of the Holy Spirit which are different in nature.

If we follow this line of thought then we conclude there isn't any
difference between Paul and say a modern day apostle (only that Paul
wrote significant chunks of the NT and modern apostles echo what Paul
first wrote). We need the modern day apostles to continue to build the
church up until maturity at which point Christ will stop giving us
apostles (as well as the rest of the Ephesians grace gifts)

-   ![Facebook profile image](media/image6.jpeg){width="1.2in"
    height="1.0in"}

By [**[Graham
Clark]{.ul}**](http://www.facebook.com/BiggestG) on *31/10/2012 at
16:31*

Is it possible that Timothy was not an apostle at the time when Paul was
writing Colossians but was by the time of 1 Thes which starts with
'Paul, Silas and Timothy, To the church...' and then uses the plural we
throughout including in 2:6 'even though as apostles of Christ'.

Its seems to me that Paul is calling himself, Silas and Timothy all
apostles. I'm not entirely sure what the time difference between the
various letters are though.

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *31/10/2012 at 17:56*

\@Josh: I don't think that view does justice to the way Paul talks about
his apostolic commission in 1 Cor 9 or 15; Paul didn't have a mere
supernatural experience, he actually saw the risen Christ.\
\@Graham: no. Colossians is certainly written after 1 Thessalonians.

-   ![Facebook profile image](media/image6.jpeg){width="1.2in"
    height="1.0in"}

By [**[Graham
Clark]{.ul}**](http://www.facebook.com/BiggestG) on *01/11/2012 at
10:51*

\@Andrew Well that idea goes out the window then.

-   ![Facebook profile image](media/image7.jpeg){width="1.0in"
    height="1.0in"}

By [**[Pete
Thorne]{.ul}**](http://www.facebook.com/petethorne) on *05/11/2012 at
23:49*

\@andrew price: I think the church history question but is answered by
the lack of faithfulness to the gospel for long periods. You need the
gospel of grace in order to have apostles of the gospel of grace.

\@Wilson: in your response to dave trigg's complaint avout the use of
the "unhelpful term apostle" you say that just because somwthing is
controversial we shouldn't avoid it, but in my experience churches (even
NF) largely avoid the terms "deacon" and "bishop" but are happy with
"pastor" - surely we should be consistent!

Author. [[David
Devenish]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/theology/contributors/406) \|
Publication Date. 01/11/2012

**There is an obvious tension when we describe apostolic ministry and
apostolic authority today. Some of the apostles of New Testament times
were forming what became recognised as the New Testament, and part of
Scripture. Modern apostles, by contrast, do not propose new apostolic
revelation; rather, they study, submit to and apply the apostolic
revelation already given in Scripture. Nevertheless, if we believe, as
we do, that apostolic ministry (in the sense lived out by Apollos,
Barnabas, Silas and co) continues today, then we still have to look at
the practices of New Testament apostles that we are familiar with in the
New Testament, to get some idea of what apostolic ministry is. Otherwise
we simply invent practices and call them apostolic. This approach
inevitably leads us to concentrate on Paul, even though we recognise
what was unique to his ministry and that of the twelve.**

Andrew has written a stimulating and
thoughtful [[article]{.ul}](http://whatyouthinkmatters.org/blog/article/apostolic-authority-how-does-it-work) on
how, biblically and practically, we work this all out. Despite agreeing
with large sections of it, however, there are a few points where I think
his view needs adjusting, and he has asked me to write and explain what
these are, and why I believe a better approach is possible, and in fact
necessary.\
  \
In the first place, I am not sure that it is helpful to distinguish
between "Capital A" and "small a" apostles.  This has become a practice
within certain evangelical circles recently.  I find it particularly in
the "missions world" with which I interact a lot, where apostolic
ministry is now fairly broadly accepted but is seen as pioneer church
planting into unreached people groups.  The distinction is therefore
made between "Capital A" apostles who defined Scripture and "small a"
apostles who plant churches in the unreached parts of the world.  The
problem this leads to is that, whilst there is pioneer evangelism and a
grappling with contextualisation issues which I applaud, there is in the
end very little authority at all. Indeed, it has become a philosophy of
ministry for many that the function of the "small a" apostle, from
another cultural context, is merely to teach the Bible and then allow
the local believers to work out contextualisation because only they
understand their own context.  In what we have been doing in the largely
unreached parts of the world, I have resisted some of this approach
(whilst being passionate about the importance of contextualisation)
because it is hardly what the apostle Paul did in Corinth (even if he
was a "Capital A" apostle!) Paul did not simply state a few principles
and then let the Corinthians work out how it applied to them; he was
very specific in some of his instructions.  I know we should not develop
our doctrine on apostolic authority in reaction to what others teach,
but it does provide a warning to us.\
  \
I am not even sure that we can make the distinction between "Capital A"
apostles and "small a" apostles in New Testament times, with the Twelve,
Paul and James the brother of Jesus in the former category, and
presumably Apollos, Barnabas, Silas and so on in the latter.  The
problem with this is that not all the "Capital A" apostles were involved
in writing what became recognised as the Canon of Scripture, and some
scholars think that some of the "small a" apostles were (such as
theories that either Barnabas or Apollos wrote Hebrews). Luke and Mark,
of course, were not apostles, and wrote the Bible anyway. So the
"Capital A" versus "small a" distinction is not as clear as it might
seem. Consequently, I think it is better simply to be clear on what
modern day apostles do, and do not, have the authority to do. They
cannot add to Scripture; they can only apply Scripture as best they
understand it, and respect the judgment of others on Scripture even if
they don't agree with it, within the confines of agreed evangelical
doctrine. Apostles today function in a particular way, and exercise a
certain amount of authority, but they submit that authority to the
revelation of Scripture, and expect those receiving the ministry of the
apostle to similarly submit to Scripture, including testing what the
apostle is saying.\
\
My answers to Andrew's seven questions are also somewhat different in
places. In respect of \#1, "Should we expect modern day apostles to be
present in spirit when church discipline is conducted in a local
church?", the first point to make is that is not easy to understand what
Paul means by this expression.  However, I would say it depends on the
circumstances and the degree of relationship between the apostle and the
church.  I do not think it is a mystical concept, but that they should
act as though Paul were there, and that because he has the Spirit, and
the Spirit of God is present with them, then through their relationship
Paul is with them with spiritual authority.  Many of the churches that I
serve I would not say that, because my relationship is not as strong as
it is with some others.  I could imagine a few churches, where Scilla
and I have lived for extended times, for them to be able to say not only
that David Devenish has instructed then to take certain action, but that
he is spiritually involved in the decision.  However I'm not sure I
could say that for many other situations.  \
  \
I agree with Andrew on \#2, that it is not appropriate for modern day
apostles to define their gospel, along the lines of Paul's "my gospel".
We are entrusted with the gospel, but we have no right to define it for
others (a point at which we are clearly distinct from Paul himself).
With \#3, "Should modern apostolic ministry involve going to unreached
people groups?", I find it difficult to prove from Scripture that all
apostles went to unreached people groups, though church tradition seems
to suggest that most of them did.  However, even if some apostles do not
feel called to do that themselves, I believe there needs to be an
encouragement and motivation from apostles with reference to Romans 1:5:
receiving grace and apostleship to bring all nations to the obedience of
faith.  This is part of the declaration of the whole counsel of God,
which is an apostolic responsibility.\
  \
\#4 is more challenging: "Ought modern apostles and prophets to see
themselves as the foundation of a church and live and serve
accordingly?" I think there is a sense in which present day apostles and
prophets are personally foundations to the churches in many instances,
even though what they teach must be in accordance with the original
foundation as set out in the New Testament. If not, then we simply join
up with many evangelical commentators who say that the foundation is now
the doctrine of the apostles and prophets, and therefore that if
apostles do still exist, they are just church planting missionaries and
overseers of churches. I would say that in the founding of churches
there is a personalised element as well, in the New Testament and today.
So for example in Acts 2, where they devoted themselves to the apostles'
teaching, it was not just to teaching but to the teaching of people they
knew and trusted who were apostles. I think this still applies today. It
does not mean that the teaching of those apostles must not be tested by
Scripture -- of course it must.  Nevertheless the family feel of the New
Testament church needs to be reproduced in our day, and therefore there
are actual people who are foundational to the life of the church. The
foundation is the same as that which was originally laid, but it needs
laying dynamically in each church in each generation by those with the
gifting, calling and relationship to do so. I agree that in many cases
today, particularly with church adoptions, it is a question of testing
the foundation rather than personally laying it completely -- but if we
deny the personal involvement of the apostles relationally as part of
the foundation, I think we are going too far away from the dynamic
intent of the New Testament.  The foundation is laid personally, not
merely by reading Berkhof or Grudem's*Systematic Theology*.  \
  \
On \#5 and \#6, I agree with Andrew's article: yes, modern apostles are
accountable directly to God for their work in the gospel and
authenticated by suffering (\#5); and whether they can command personal
favours or not depends on the relationship involved (\#6). With \#7,
though, I find myself disagreeing slightly: "Can a modern apostle speak
directly to a local church to correct inaccurate theology, without going
through the elders?" Andrew believes that the answer is no, but I am not
so sure. One of the possible mistakes of emphasis that we have made in
Newfrontiers over the last 30 years has been to have a relationship
between apostle (or delegate) and the elders, or sometimes even just
between the apostle and the lead elder, rather than between the apostle
and the church. Sometimes, I'm sure, that has been because of a correct
reaction to the approach of apostles who did not believe in the autonomy
of the local church. But I think it is possible -- hard to define, but
easier to discern -- for apostles to have a recognition of the authority
of local elders, whilst still being able, out of their relationship, to
speak to the church as a whole about doctrinal issues (or anything else)
if they think the elders are getting it wrong.\
\
It is extremely helpful to talk these ideas out in public, and because
of our commitment to apostolic ministry today, it is also very important
for the health of the churches we serve. Working out what it means, in
practice, for apostles to serve churches -- and what apostolic authority
actually looks like -- is an important challenge, and one that benefits
from theological discussions like these. Hopefully these reflections
will prove helpful, as we seek to bring about the obedience of faith
among all nations!

![David Devenish Photo](media/image8.jpeg){width="0.5215277777777778in"
height="0.5736111111111111in"}

**Church: **Woodside Church, Bedford\
**Church Website: **woodsidechurch.com 

-   [[Like
    this]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-a-response-from-david-devenish)

-   [[Share
    this]{.ul} ](http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=newfrontiers)

Top of Form

Unfortunately we are temporarily unable to moderate comments, so only
comments from verified users will appear. Please [[sign
in]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-a-response-from-david-devenish) (you
can create an account at the top right of this page) or log in with
Facebook to be able to have your say. Thank you. We apologise for this
inconvenience.

Sign in with your facebook account by clicking the button below.

[[Login to comment with
Facebook]{.ul}](http://thinktheology.co.uk/blog/article/apostolic-authority-a-response-from-david-devenish)

Bottom of Form

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *01/11/2012 at 10:07*

Great response! One brief point of clarification, though: I did not
argue that the A/a distinction is between scripture-writers and others,
but between eyewitnesses and others. This, I believe, is a distinction
that Luke and Paul both made in their writings, and as such needs to be
preserved (even if the capital letters are not the best way of
indicating this!)

-   ![Dan Smith Photo](media/image9.jpeg){width="0.48680555555555555in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Dan Smith** on *01/11/2012 at 10:59*

Thanks for the article. Do you have a series of markers to look
for/questions to ask in order to test a church's foundations?

\@Andrew how about Apostles and Bpostles?

-   ![Default user
    Photo](media/image4.jpeg){width="0.5215277777777778in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By [**[Steve
Vaughan]{.ul}**](http://www.stevevaughan10.com/) on *02/11/2012 at
07:57*

Hello Andrew & Dave,

Thank you both for your excellent posts.

Unless I missed this verse as I was reading your articles isn't 1
Corinthians 9.1-2 a KEY verse in all this where Paul distinguishes
between (1) Eye-witnesses and (2) Fathering churches as two types of
apostleship?

9 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not SEEN Jesus our Lord?
Are you not the RESULT of my work in the Lord? 2 Even though I may not
be an apostle to others, surely I am to you! For you are the SEAL of my
apostleship in the Lord.

Is he not saying to them...let me prove to you that I am apostles

\(1\) Because I have seen Jesus, which is what is needed to be an
apostle (Acts 1.22)

\(2\) Because I am your spiritual father. If I hadn't told you the
gospel and then fathered you, you wouldn't exist!

Again, I read this late last night so if these 2 verses were talked
about in the articles and I missed then, then forgive me.

Steve

-   ![Andrew Wilson
    Photo](media/image3.png){width="0.5388888888888889in"
    height="0.5215277777777778in"}

By **Andrew Wilson** on *03/11/2012 at 07:24*

\@Steve: I agree with you that these are the two key roles of an
apostle, but I don't think Paul's point in that text is to delineate and
separate them; his point is more, "here's two reasons why you can be
certain that I am an apostle". But the broader point is right, I think:
there are eyewitness Apostles, and apostles who see people converted in
a community and have an authority on the basis of their spiritual
fathering of people.

-   ![Facebook profile image](media/image7.jpeg){width="1.0in"
    height="1.0in"}

By [**[Pete
Thorne]{.ul}**](http://www.facebook.com/petethorne) on *06/11/2012 at
00:07*

\@andrew: so if a church grows up without an apostle then gains one
later in its life how can the "spiritual fathering" role be played out?
(Asked with a not-entirely-hypothetical situation in mind)
