---
title: Leadership Self Evaluation
type: document
---
**REDPATH'S SELF-EXAMINATION QUESTIONS**

The Christians life is sometimes complicated in that it often requires
us to walk a balance. It is easy to run to one extreme or another, and
the enemy of our soul is happy for us to follow one extreme as the
other.

One area where balance is necessary is the place of self-examination.
Too much looking inward, too much self-examination, is a bad thing. The
focus of the Christian life is Jesus Christ, not self. We are to die to
self and live to Jesus. On the other side, to *never* spend time in true
self-examination is also dangerous. We must, from time to time, examine
our life and work ( spend time in true self-examination is also
dangerous. We must, from time to time, examine our life and work (1
Corinthians 11:28, 2 Corinthians 13:5, and Galatians 6:4).

Many years ago, I read this section by Alan Redpath, taken from his
wonderful book on Nehemiah, *Victorious Christian Service*. I recommend
it to you as a good checklist of self-examination, and trust that you
will use it properly.

**SELF-EXAMINATION QUESTIONS**

*by Alan Redpath*

Some time ago at an all-night of prayer in my church I read a list I use
myself called "Self-examination questions," because I am desperately
concerned in my own life on these things. I want to give this list to
you, lest you think it is a comfortable, easy sort of business, this
recognition of sin:

***WHAT ABOUT MY RELATIONSHIP WITH MEN?***

Am I consciously or unconsciously creating the impression that I am a
better man than I really am? Is there the least suspicion of hypocrisy
in my life? Am I honest in all my words and acts? Do I exaggerate?

Am I reliable? Can I be trusted? Do I confidentially pass on what was
told to me in confidence? Do I grumble and complain in the church?

Am I jealous, impure, irritable, touchy, distrustful? Am I self-
conscious, self-pitying, or self-justifying? Am I proud? Do I thank God
I am not as other people? Is there anyone I fear, or dislike, or
criticize, or resent? If so, what am I doing about it?

***WHAT ABOUT MY DEVOTION TO GOD?***

Does the Bible live to me? Do I give it time to speak to me? Do I go to
bed in time and do I get up in time?

Am I enjoying my prayer life today? Did I enjoy it this morning? When I
am involved in a problem in life, do I talk about it or pray about it?

Am I disobeying God in anything, or insisting upon doing something about
which my conscience is very uneasy?

When did I last speak to someone else with the object of trying to win
him for Christ?

Am I a slave to books, dress, friends, work, or what others think? How
do I spend my spare time?

ALAN REDPATH, *VICTORIUS CHRISTIAN SERVICE*

[Kevin Halloran](https://unlockingthebible.org/author/kevin-halloran/)

Our physical lives need routine check-ups to see that we are healthy and
to prevent and diagnose health problems before they become a major
threat to our lives. Our spiritual lives are susceptible to problems as
well and require self-examination in order to purge the unhealthy
tendencies we have and replace them with the habits that God desires.

Here are 7 Questions to evaluate where you are in the Christian life:

**1. Am I praying with faith?**

I could have asked, "Am I praying?"  That would be a good question, but
this question goes further.  In Luke 18, Jesus teaches us that we ought
always to pray. Then at the end of that teaching he asks a question:
"When the son of man comes will he find faith on the earth?" Notice, He
doesn't ask, "Will the son of man find prayer on the earth?" but "Will
the son of man find faith on the earth?" Why? Because what matters is
not that I am saying my prayers, like the Pharisees did, and like
millions of people in all religions around the world do.

What matters is that I'm praying with faith. Do I have confidence in God
to do more than I can do? Or have I wandered into the spiritual
wasteland of evaluating everything in terms of what I see as humanly
possible---the easiest thing to do when you've been a Christian for 10,
20, 30 years.

**2. Am I serving with zeal?**

I take this question straight from the Scriptures. Romans 12:8 says "The
one who leads," must lead "with zeal." There's something about passion
here, something about vision and something about direction. The leader
must care passionately about where he or she is going. 1 Peter 5:2 says
to leaders, "Be shepherds of God's flock that is under your care,
serving as overseers, not because you must but because you are willing
as God wants you to be."

In the film, Parenthood, Steve Martin plays an overworked father trying
to do his best for a family under pressure. One day he quits his job,
and when he gets home, he finds the kids running wild and his wife tells
him that she is pregnant. He does not react well.  Then when it's time
to take his son to a baseball game, his wife wants to talk and she says,
"Do you have to?" He says, "My whole life is 'have to.'" You've been
there, and so have I. But that's not a place from which we can lead
others. Are you serving with zeal?

**3. Am I believing with confidence?**

God says that "the gospel... is the power of God for salvation to
everyone who believes" (Romans 1:16). Do I believe that? Do I believe
that when I pray for an unbelieving friend or relative? Do I believe
that God is able to save them through the Gospel?

When I struggle with a powerful temptation, with a habit that is
difficult to overcome, do I believe that God is able to deliver me
through the Gospel? When I become tired, get discouraged, begin to
wonder how long I can continue, do I believe that the God who saved me
is able to keep me?

**4. Am I confessing with humility?**

Martin Luther said, "When our Lord and Master Jesus Christ said
'Repent,' He meant that the whole life of a believer should be
repentance."  Christ calls us, not to a prayer of repentance, but to
a life of repentance, a life of turning ever more fully to Jesus Christ.

A life of repentance is not a life of misery, but a life of growth. It's
a life in which the Holy Spirit is constantly opening your eyes to how
you can take the next step in becoming more like Jesus. A process of
examination like this may begin to connect this reality with your life
now.

A Christian is a person who has light to see what there needs to be less
of and what there needs to be more of in his or her life. This leads to
a life of confession, in which you see your sins and your failings, and
you keep bringing them under the blood of Christ.

When you live life like this, you don't waste your life in the shallow
water of compromised obedience, instead you launch out into the deep
oceans of following Christ.  Can you name a sin that you have confessed
in the last week?  In the last month?

**5. Am I worshipping with joy?**

I come to worship. Do I participate or do I observe? In the presence of
Jesus, there will not be a single person with their arms folded,
listening to the angels and observing the worship. We will all sing. We
will all shout for joy. Ask yourself, "Am I worshipping with joy?" If
not, why not?

**6. Am I giving with gladness?**

Giving is an indicator of love within marriage. A marriage that's marked
by withholding is not healthy. Giving is also an indicator of your love
for Christ and your love for the bride of Christ. "I work to earn money
that I gladly give to the bride." Is that true of me? Or am I tiring of
that?

**7. Am I reaching out with love?**

Here we are in a world of need, and some Christians are stretched out in
sacrifice, so that lost people on their way to an eternal darkness may
see the light of Christ through the Gospel and be saved. What about you?
