---
title: 2014-10-26 Matthew 22_34 love God
type: document
---
**Matthew 22:34-46**

Hearing that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, the Pharisees got
together. One of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this
question: \"Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?\"
Jesus replied: \"'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul and with all your mind.' This is the first and greatest
commandment. And the second is like it: 'Love your neighbour as
yourself.' All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two
commandments.\" While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked
them, \"What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?\" \"The son
of David,\" they replied. He said to them, \"How is it then that David,
speaking by the Spirit, calls him 'Lord'? For he says, \"'The Lord said
to my Lord: \"Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your
feet.\"' If then David calls him 'Lord', how can he be his son?\" No-one
could say a word in reply, and from that day on no-one dared to ask him
any more questions.

**1 Thess 2:1-8**

You know, brothers, that our visit to you was not a failure. We had
previously suffered and been insulted in Philippi, as you know, but with
the help of our God we dared to tell you his gospel in spite of strong
opposition. For the appeal we make does not spring from error or impure
motives, nor are we trying to trick you. On the contrary, we speak as
men approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel. We are not trying
to please men but God, who tests our hearts. You know we never used
flattery, nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed---God is our
witness. We were not looking for praise from men, not from you or anyone
else. As apostles of Christ we could have been a burden to you, but we
were gentle among you, like a mother caring for her little children. We
loved you so much that we were delighted to share with you not only the
gospel of God but our lives as well, because you had become so dear to
us.

# Preach

The gospel shows us the Pharisees trying yet again to challenge Jesus
over the Law of Moses. Having answered the Pharisees question Jesus asks
one of His own. It may sound to us as if He is simply trying to beat the
Sadducees and Pharisees at their own game by posing an imponderable
question: First he asks a very straight forward question:

\"What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?\" \"The son of
David,\" they replied.

\"The son of David\" was the term used by most people in that day to
refer to the expected Messiah. The blind man called out "Son of David
have mercy on me!" and at His entrance to Jerusalem the people cried out
"Hosanna to the Son of David". This title places the messiah firmly in
the family line of David; a son of Israel; one of the people. A great
and inspirational leader, one with the ear of God no doubt, but most
certainly an Israelite man.

But Jesus shows that such a title is inadequate. How can he be a son of
Israel in David's line when David himself addresses Him as Lord?

Jesus said to them, \"How is it then that David, speaking by the Spirit,
calls him 'Lord'? For he says, 'The Lord said to my Lord: \"Sit at my
right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.\"' If then David
calls him 'Lord', how can he be his son?\"

Jesus showed that the title "Son of David" was inadequate. The Messiah
anticipated by the scriptures which the Sadducees and Scribes and
Pharisees studied so carefully was David's Lord; He was the Son of God
and these teachers were face to face with Him.

But they could not see their savior.

Paul had had a difficult time going from city to city during his second
missionary journey with Silas and Timothy. In each city the Jewish
community stirred up riots against them and after their expulsion tried
to discredit their message and undermine their reputation. Yet in just a
few weeks before being driven out of Thessalonica they managed to
establish a lively and faithful church. Paul had been banned from the
city and went on to Corinth, but he had sent Timothy back to encourage
them. Timothy returned to Corinth with good news of the Thessalonian
church -- it was advancing in the face of persecution from the Jews, but
they had some questions for Paul. This letter was Pauls prompt reply.

Having started his letter with great thanksgiving for their faith and
perseverance he goes on -- in the passage we read this morning -- to
defend himself against the Jewish accusations of being a charlatan --
teaching error and just trying to get a personal following for his own
selfish gain.

Far from preaching for personal gain, he did so at great personal cost.
Indeed he was not preaching even to please those who received his
message, but to please God. And because God is both his Master and
Judge, he was careful to avoid flattery or in any way to make the gospel
more appealing or easier to receive. Neither was he trying to gain their
approval for bringing them news of salvation in Christ. And even though
his mission to them was entirely for their benefit, he was careful not
to be a burden to them in any way, but rather to love them.

It is perfectly clear from Paul's writings that when he preached the
gospel he did so not with words alone, but also with signs and wonders;
healings and deliverance and other miracles which authenticated his
preaching. He announced deliverance from evil through faith in Jesus
Christ and then proved it through healing the sick and delivering the
demonized. There was plenty of evidence that Paul was preaching truth
approved of by God. Yet still religious people attacked him and tried to
discredit his message.

Both Paul's letter and our gospel reading show us that the Jewish
religious leaders posed the greatest opposition to the gospel.

How is it that religious people can become so critical and cynical and
so absorbed in conformation to their own treasured ways that they can be
face to face with God their savior and yet only see a threat to their
own comfort and status?

How can devoted religious people be so blind to God?

I think the reason that religious people both then and now sometimes
reject what God is doing is because they love their religious practices
and mistake this for "love for God". The Pharisees loved their rules
more than they loved God. Perhaps there would not be so many
denominations in the church if we loved God more than our particular
religious practices. How is it that the church is so divided when the
one intercessory prayer of Jesus recorded for us in the bible is focused
on unity amongst believers? No doubt each division was between people
who claimed to be loving God. We have to admit that we have got things
wrong somewhere along the line.

I think this is why there is not one place in the NT where Christians
are commanded to love God.

No, you didn't miss hear me. There is not one place in the NT where
Christians are commanded to love God. It is true that Jesus summarized
the Law of Moses saying the greatest commandment is 'Love the Lord your
God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.'
Yet neither Jesus nor any subsequent NT writer addressed this command to
Christian believers.

In setting out the new law for Christians, Jesus says:

"A new command I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you
must love one another." **John 13:34**

This is the new First Commandment, replacing the command to love God.
That command is replaced by a modified version:

"Whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. He
who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too will love him and
show myself to him. ... If anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. My
Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with
him. He who does not love me will not obey my teaching." (**John
14:21-24**)

So the command to love God with all our heart is replaced by the command
to obey Jesus' commands by which we show our love for God. Love is
demonstrated by obedience.

This subtle change is nevertheless very important and significant. God
is not looking for demonstrations of love through religious observance.
Knowing the bible, singing hymns, going to church, saying our prayers...
none of these things are commanded by Jesus and none, of themselves,
impress God.

Jesus' commands, of which there are nearly 40, fall into 5 categories:

1.  Relationship with God -- (Be born again and remain in Him)

2.  Love One Another -- (Love one another and love our enemies)

3.  Trust God -- (Put God first and don't worry like an unbeliever)

4.  Holiness -- (Avoid sin and don't try to impress men with your
    holiness)

5.  Witness -- (Go and make disciples)

The only measure of our love for God is our obedience to His commands.
Of course our obedience must be rooted in our relationship with God, and
hence our love for Him, otherwise He will say to us, "Depart from me! I
never knew you." Nevertheless, the NT is quite clear: God's love is
poured into our hearts so that in our love for Him we might obey his
commands. John puts it like this:

"This is how we know that we love the children of God: by loving God and
carrying out his commands. This is love for God: to obey his commands.
And his commands are not burdensome." (**1 John 5:2-3**)

In summary:

We have seen that both Jesus and Paul struggled against religious
blindness in those who should have been most ready to receive Jesus. We
see Jesus challenge the common conception of the Messiah -- He was not a
mere man but God Himself in the flesh. And Paul reminds us that it is
God who tests our hearts and He is the only one whose approval we should
seek.

Jesus has reformulated the law for Christians: Love one another and
demonstrate our love for God by obeying Jesus' commands.

It was precisely because Paul preached the new law of love rather than
the old Law of Moses that he was so strongly opposed by the Jews.

So where does all this leave us?

Empty religious observance is a dead end.

Thank God that Jesus has made things simple for us. You don't need to
know all the doctrines and be able to solve biblical riddles. You don't
need to count your steps on the Sabbath or wear your Sunday best. God
does not want us to try and please Him by doing our duty.

Knowing God is not about knowing the rules, it is about knowing and
receiving His love for us. Paul's caring like a mother for the
Thessalonians was a reflection of God's caring like a mother for us. God
knows the struggles we have. He does not demand our love, but freely
pours His out to us. Our love for God is a natural result of receiving
His love for us. Having received His love we need to heed His commands,
the greatest of which is to love one another.

So let us open our hearts to Him and make Him alone our hearts desire.
As we receive His love we are able to love one another and so prove to
be His disciples.
