---
title: 2014-12-14 Isa61
type: document
---
"The Spirit of the Sovereign LORD is on me, because the LORD has
anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to bind up
the broken-hearted, to proclaim freedom for the captives and release
from darkness for the prisoners, to proclaim the year of the LORD's
favour and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn,
and provide for those who grieve in Zion---to bestow on them a crown of
beauty instead of ashes, the oil of gladness instead of mourning, and a
garment of praise instead of a spirit of despair. They will be called
oaks of righteousness, a planting of the LORD for the display of his
splendour. They will rebuild the ancient ruins and restore the places
long devastated; they will renew the ruined cities that have been
devastated for generations. Aliens will shepherd your flocks; foreigners
will work your fields and vineyards. And you will be called priests of
the LORD, you will be named ministers of our God. You will feed on the
wealth of nations, and in their riches you will boast. Instead of their
shame my people will receive a double portion, and instead of disgrace
they will rejoice in their inheritance; and so they will inherit a
double portion in their land, and everlasting joy will be theirs. \"For
I, the LORD, love justice; I hate robbery and iniquity. In my
faithfulness I will reward them and make an everlasting covenant with
them. Their descendants will be known among the nations and their
offspring among the peoples. All who see them will acknowledge that they
are a people the LORD has blessed.\" I delight greatly in the LORD; my
soul rejoices in my God. For he has clothed me with garments of
salvation and arrayed me in a robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom
adorns his head like a priest, and as a bride adorns herself with her
jewels. For as the soil makes the young plant come up and a garden
causes seeds to grow, so the Sovereign LORD will make righteousness and
praise spring up before all nations." (Isa 61:1-11 NIV)

"There came a man who was sent from God; his name was John. He came as a
witness to testify concerning that light, so that through him all men
might believe. He himself was not the light; he came only as a witness
to the light." ... "Now this was John's testimony when the Jews of
Jerusalem sent priests and Levites to ask him who he was. He did not
fail to confess, but confessed freely, \"I am not the Christ.\" They
asked him, \"Then who are you? Are you Elijah?\" He said, \"I am not.\"
\"Are you the Prophet?\" He answered, \"No.\" Finally they said, \"Who
are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do
you say about yourself?\" John replied in the words of Isaiah the
prophet, \"I am the voice of one calling in the desert, 'Make straight
the way for the Lord.'\" Now some Pharisees who had been sent questioned
him, \"Why then do you baptise if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah,
nor the Prophet?\" \"I baptise with water,\" John replied, \"but among
you stands one you do not know. He is the one who comes after me, the
thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.\" This all happened at
Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptising." (Joh
1:19-28 NIV)

## The Secret Message of Jesus. 

John had crowds go out to hear him preach, and many even received
baptism. They were happy to hear John's message; to turn away from their
broken lives and to turn their hearts towards God. They enjoyed John's
message about the coming Messiah and the freedom and restoration He
would bring. John prepared the way so that when Jesus started His
ministry there was a readymade crowd for Him to teach.

John the Baptist taught about how we should live our lives and about
Jesus restoring us to God. Jesus developed these same themes through His
teachings, parables and stories, telling us how to live and about both
the love and judgement of God our Father.

Jesus soon had huge crowds following Him, hanging on His every word and
being amazed and blessed by His healing miracles. The crowds loved this
teaching. This teaching is acceptable, even to modern-day sceptics and
atheists. They all praise the outstandingly wise and moral teachings of
Jesus which continue to form the bedrock of our moral and legal systems.

But there is more to Jesus' teaching than meets the eye. Jesus said a
very strange thing to His disciples:

> \"The knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of God has been given to
> you, but to others I speak in parables, so that, \'though seeing, they
> may not see; though hearing, they may not understand.\'" (Luke 8:10).

There is a secret message in the Gospels that Jesus intentionally hid
from the crowds because they could not accept it, and it remains hidden
to this day. The secret message of the kingdom is there for those who
have eyes to see, ears to hear and hearts to receive it but for most it
remains hidden. My prayer is that this morning God will grant us the
grace to open our hearts to the secret message of the kingdom.

As I said, John the Baptist's message and what the gospels tell us about
Jesus' healings and parables and teaching is generally acceptable, even
if sometimes quite a challenge to live up to.

But we might notice from a careful reading of the Gospels, that Jesus
was not particularly impressed with people that accepted this message
and decided to follow Him:

> "Many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
> But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all people."
> (Jn 2:24)

Like these crowds we can rejoice that Jesus is our saviour and cheer Him
on, but Jesus is not looking for fans or followers. He was not impressed
by the crowds and did not entrust himself to them.

The Scribes were diligent in studying the scriptures and were devoted to
understanding and teaching God's word. But Jesus said to them:

> "You study the Scriptures diligently because you think that in them
> you have eternal life. These are the very Scriptures that testify
> about me, yet you refuse to come to me to have life." (Jn 5:39)

Like these scribes we can be devoted to bible reading and learning all
about Jesus, but Jesus is clearly not impressed with our understanding
of doctrine or our knowledge of the scriptures.

He sent the Pharisees away saying that in their enthusiasm for religion
they made it hard for those seeking God to actually find Him.

> "You must be careful to do everything \[the religious leaders\] tell
> you. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they
> preach. They tie up heavy, cumbersome loads and put them on other
> people's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a
> finger to move them." (Matt 23:1)

Like these Pharisees, we might be committed to church and faithful in
our religious observance, but Jesus is not impressed with our devotion.

And then, to cap it all, Jesus says:

> "Many will say to me on that day, 'Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in
> your name and in your name drive out demons and in your name perform
> many miracles?' Then I will tell them plainly, 'I never knew you.'"
> (Matt 7:22)

Surely such people are the most committed believers Jesus could wish to
have -- even performing miracles in His name! What more can Jesus
possibly want?

These are some of the uncomfortable sayings of Jesus which somehow never
found their way into our liturgies. For those who have ears to hear, it
should be evident that there is more to Jesus Gospel than believing He
is the Son of God and that He died to restore our relationship with God.

If belief in Jesus and following Christian practices is not enough to
share in the Kingdom of God, then what is? What is the Secret of the
Kingdom which Jesus hid from the crowds?

Thankfully the Gospels also give us the hidden teachings of Jesus, which
He kept mostly to His disciples. John the Baptist did not know this
secret, nor did the Old Testament writers. Many early Christians missed
it and many Christians today have yet to discover this secret message,
which I want to try and share with you today. It is most appropriate to
consider this during Advent when we think about the incarnation of
Jesus, because that is what this secret is about - the incarnation of
Jesus.

The secret of the Kingdom is far more radical than a set of beliefs and
religious practices. He shared it with Nicodemus:

> \"I tell you the truth, no-one can enter the kingdom of God unless he
> is born again. Born of water and the Spirit. Flesh gives birth to
> flesh, but the Spirit gives birth to spirit." (Jn 3:5-6)

There is nothing here about believing in Jesus or trying to be like Him.
The secret of the Kingdom is far more radical -- nothing short of
starting again with a new life -- God living in us brought about by the
Spirit of God. Jesus incarnate in us.

It is an encounter with the living Jesus of such magnitude and
significance, that Jesus describes it as being born again. It is not
just a new belief but a new life -- the life of Jesus within us. It is
Jesus incarnate in us! Jesus living in us and through us. Influencing
our minds and behaviour, changing our values and priorities - indeed
possessing us is not too strong a description. This is not meant to be a
concept or metaphor but a reality.

The secret of the Kingdom is more vividly expressed later in John's
gospel where Jesus says:

> \"I tell you the truth, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
> drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whoever eats my flesh and
> drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
> day. For my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink. Whoever
> eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him." (Jn
> 6:53-56).

This is one of the most difficult and perplexing things that Jesus said.
Only those with ears to hear can make any sense of or accept this truth.
Not surprisingly, when Jesus said this we are told:

> From this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer
> followed him. (v 66).

What we read here is the hidden message of Jesus, the Secret of the
Kingdom. Jesus is saying that we need to take His life into us. The
picture is one of taking His life into our bodies; eating Him, so that
His life becomes our life. Again Jesus is talking about being incarnate
in us. Jesus living in us and through us.

Anyone can handle the idea of trying to emulate the loving acceptance of
Jesus. Many believe that Jesus was God incarnate and worship Him as God.
But not so many are prepared to let Jesus take over their lives.

My faith and my relationship with God has changed massively in recent
years. I used to be almost entirely taken up with the beliefs of our
faith -- Christian doctrine and teaching. I studied both old and new
testaments extensively and have been teaching theology for thirty years.
But I spent relatively little time in the Gospels -- there's not much
doctrine in the gospels. But a few years ago God said to me that it was
time I got to know Jesus! And since then I have rarely strayed from the
gospels in my personal reading and study. I have been confronted in the
Gospels by the realisation that Jesus intends us to live as He did, in
the power and presence of God. I have to confess that I rarely feel I
have understood what I read. But I am not reading for understanding, but
rather for encounter. I realise that I must eat His flesh and drink His
blood. His life needs to become my life. And that needs to find
expression both inwardly in the state of my own inner world -- my
thoughts and feelings, my confidence in God, being able to hear His
voice and discern His will. And there is also the outward expression --
which is equally hard, in changed behaviour, in courageous witness and
bold prayer. Although since this change I have seen Jesus do amazing
things, particularly in healing, I feel that I am only at the beginning
of this adventure. But what a difference there has been since I have
stopped trying to become more like Jesus, and instead begun to recognise
His incarnation in me.

We all know what it means to try and be like someone. No doubt we have
all at some time had our heroes that we tried to emulate -- usually in
the trivial outward ways of clothes and mannerisms. But most of us
eventually grow out of it when we realise that we are the same people
inside.

The secret message of the Kingdom is that we are not called to emulate
Jesus, but to incarnate Him.

Jesus' incarnation in us is even more amazing than His incarnation in
His fleshly body. He was born as a baby into poverty. But He was able to
live a perfect life, fully expressing the grace and truth of God. He
rose from the dead and is now worshipped by myriads of angels in blazing
glory.

Jesus was willing to come in the most humiliating way in the most
humiliating context. But to be incarnate in me? Jesus was rejected and
crucified by sinful creatures like me. Yet He is prepared to clothe
Himself in my flesh, and be represented in the world by my poor and
reluctant witness.

He is willing to come to us in our spiritual and emotional and moral
sickness and be incarnate in us. He is prepared to dwell in us in our
weakness and disobedience, in our ignorance and unbelief. And He is
prepared to have people mock Him in us, misunderstand Him in us, reject
Him in us and be blind to Him in us.

Yet that is the Secret of the Kingdom -- Jesus incarnate in Christian
believers.
