---
title: 2014-07-06 Rom 7,Matt11
type: document
---
**Rom 7:15-25** "I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do I
do not do, but what I hate I do. And if I do what I do not want to do, I
agree that the law is good. As it is, it is no longer I myself who do
it, but it is sin living in me. I know that nothing good lives in me,
that is, in my sinful nature. For I have the desire to do what is good,
but I cannot carry it out. For what I do is not the good I want to do;
no, the evil I do not want to do---this I keep on doing. Now if I do
what I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin
living in me that does it. So I find this law at work: When I want to do
good, evil is right there with me. For in my inner being I delight in
God's law; but I see another law at work in the members of my body,
waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the
law of sin at work within my members. What a wretched man I am! Who will
rescue me from this body of death? Thanks be to God---through Jesus
Christ our Lord! So then, I myself in my mind am a slave to God's law,
but in the sinful nature a slave to the law of sin."

**Mt 11:29-30** "Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am
gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For
my yoke is easy and my burden is light."

Launcelot Gobbo was in turmoil. He was the servant of Shylock the
wealthy Jew in Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice. He had been deeply
offended by his master and was struggling with the temptation to run
away...

> My conscience tells me not to run from the Jew my master. The fiend is
> at my elbow, and tempts me, saying, "Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good
> Launcelot," or  "good Gobbo," or  "good Launcelot Gobbo, use your
> legs, run away." 
>
> My conscience says, "No, take heed honest Launcelot, take heed honest
> Gobbo," or as aforesaid "honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not run, scorn
> running." 
>
> Well the most courageous fiend bids me go, "Fia!" says the fiend,
> "away!" says the fiend, "and run!" 
>
> Well, my conscience hanging about my heart, says very wisely to me,
> "My honest friend Launcelot" ---for I am an honest man's son,---well,
> my conscience says "Launcelot budge not!"
>
> "Budge!" says the fiend,  "Budge not!" says my conscience.
> "Conscience" say I, "you counsel  well,--- Fiend" say I, "you counsel
> well."
>
> My conscience tells me to stay with the Jew my master; and to run away
> from the Jew I would be obeying the fiend. My conscience is a hard
> conscience to counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives me more
> friendly advice. I will run fiend, my heels are at your command, I
> will run!

Shakespeare must have read Romans 7 for his morning quiet time on the
day he got to this point in the Merchant of Venice. On the other hand,
it is a common enough experience to struggle with our conscience in the
face of a strong temptation.

Paul starts with the statement "I do not understand what I do"
describing the perplexity we often feel when we know perfectly well what
we ought to do, yet still do the opposite. Our conscience can seem a
hard task-master. The fiend gives pleasanter counsel. Anyone struggling
to lose weight will be only too familiar with this scenario.

Paul analyses what is going on. He points out that when we want to do
the right thing, even if we fail, then we do at least agree that the
right thing is ultimately good. He calls this right thing the law. This
law is the principal or value we are wanting to live by, even though we
sometimes fail. So, he says, our problem is not with the law. When we
fail to do what we know is right, we do not argue about the rightness of
the law, we simply fail when it comes to obeying it.

This reminds me of a campaign we had in our previous village to get the
speed limit reduced. The police said that they would not impose a speed
limit that drivers were unwilling to observe. In other words, laws are
not much use if the majority of people don't agree with them. Paul's
observation is that our conscience shows us that we are in agreement
with the law that we want to obey.

This clearly does not apply when we ignore a speed limit because we
think it has been set too low. The struggle Paul describes applies when
we are in agreement with our conscience, not when we think it
unreasonable.

So how is it that we sometimes struggle to do what we agree we ought to
do? Paul attributes this struggle to sin living in us and he
differentiates that sinful nature from the "I" who knows and agrees with
what is good. He says, "if I do what I do not want to do, it is no
longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it."

I'm not sure how well this argument would go down in court! "I'm sorry
my lord, but it wasn't me that stole the cream cake, it was sin living
in me." Perhaps the judge would say, "Well if you can deliver your sin
over to me we will lock that up, otherwise you will both have to go to
gaol together!"

So who are these two beings? He says,

> "For in my inner being I delight in God's law; but I see another law
> at work in the members of my body, waging war against the law of my
> mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within my
> members."

Paul identifies "I" with his inner being, his mind. It is the rational
part of us. The sinful part he says works in his members, not in his
mind. This sounds a little strange to us, but it was the way people in
that culture thought about themselves. You might remember how Jesus used
the same language when he said, "If your hand or eye causes you to sin,
cut it off..."

Nowadays, we would not say our hand or eye cause us to sin, but that our
emotions got the better of us. Where Paul makes the distinction between
mind and bodily members, we would make the same distinction between our
reason and our emotions.

So we might translate this passage as follows:

> In my rational moments I delight in God's law; but sometimes something
> else is going on in my emotions, urging me to act against my reason.
> My emotions so often win the day, taking my reason prisoner. It is
> only later when my emotions have calmed down that I regret what I have
> done.

Even when our rational mind agrees with God's good will for us,
sometimes our emotions get the better of us, and lead us to act
differently. And the struggle Paul describes is one in which the
emotions win.

You are fed up, or bored or stressed -- these emotions may tempt you to
eat a comfort snack. Your reason says, "It'll make you fat" but your
emotion wins the argument.

You are offended by someone's remark; your reason says, "Don't aggrevate
things" but your emotions want to hit back.

You are tired and the phone rings. You see it is your hypochondriac
sister-in-law. Your reason reminds you that you promised to speak to her
today, but your emotions decide you are out. We are all familiar with
these situations.

What Paul says next is the really important bit. It is the crux of the
chapter. First he says, "What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me
from this body of death?"

Paul is writing about the Christian faith in relation to the Jewish Law.
And there are two serious problems. Firstly that we need forgiveness for
our disobedience, and secondly, we need help to stop sinning in the
first place. The Law has no solution to either problem.

The Law is not just the 10 commandments, but the entire 613 laws set
down by Moses in the scriptures. The law provided for forgiveness where
a person broke the law, but only for inadvertent, unconscious
contraventions. And then a sacrifice had to be made at the temple in
Jerusalem.

That really doesn't resolve the problem of sin. What about all our
conscious sin where emotion wins over our rational mind? The Law had no
solution to this problem. Paul says that the Law is good in that its
regulations are good for us, but it provides no help in either obtaining
forgiveness from God, cleansing our conscience from guilt, or
strengthening us against repeated sin.

That leads Paul to cry out, "What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue
me from this body of death?" I am not only wretched because my life is
messed up by sin, but also, and more significantly, my relationship with
God is messed up by my sin, and I am justly subject to God's wrath for
my sinful behaviour. That is why Paul describes his body as a "body of
death."

Without Jesus in our lives that is the state we are in! Living in a body
that will eventually be condemned to death! That is not a popular notion
these days, where we all have to be politically correct. But the Gospel
is not concerned with being nice, it is more concerned with being true.
Jesus said again and again, "I do not speak my own words, or on my own
authority, but what I have seen in the Father's presence and heard from
Him, that is what I teach." (e.g. Jn 8:38 see 34-38 Jesus also says we
are slaves to sin).

So, according to both Paul, and Jesus, we are slaves to sin and need a
deliverer. We need deliverance from the penalty of our sin, and
deliverance from the powerful temptation to sin.

"Thanks be to God," Paul says, "through Jesus Christ our Lord!" Jesus is
our deliverer on both counts.

That is where the chapter ends, but it is not the end of Paul's
explanation and we cannot stop here. We must venture into at least the
first verse of Romans 8.

"Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ
Jesus." (Ro 8:1)

Paul delivers one of the most wonderful statements of scripture: "there
is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus." If every
Christian knew and believed this short statement, the church would be a
happier place.

Jesus said (in our gospel reading) "Come to me, all you who are weary
and burdened, and I will give you rest." Jesus said He did not come to
condemn us but to save us from our sins. To forgive and cleanse us; to
set our guilty consciences free; to deliver us from the condemnation
that the Law pronounces upon us. "There is now no condemnation for those
who are in Christ Jesus."

All we need to do to be "rescued from our body of death" is to come to
Jesus; to put our trust in Him as God's Son who died in our place.

This is the first part of the solution to the problem Paul has
highlighted. Through putting our trust in Jesus we are delivered from
the penalty of sin, and from its nagging accusation of worthlessness.
Self-condemnation should be a thing of the past for a Christian. God's
forgiveness is a treasure we should take daily delight in.

The second part of the problem Paul raises is our weakness against
temptation. Our gospel reading gives us the solution.

> \"Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you
> rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and
> humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is
> easy and my burden is light.

Wretchedness is not the way to respond to overwhelming temptation. It
does nothing to clear our conscience and nothing to strengthen us
against further temptation.

Our pathetic response to our own weakness is so often to do a kind of
penance by feeling wretched for a suitable length of time -- anything
from a few minutes to a few days usually suffices. But this achieves
nothing and does not please God.

The only effective way to respond to our weakness is to dare to rejoice
in God's amazing grace.

Since God does not condemn us we should not condemn ourselves, but
rather find rest for our souls in Him. And there, enwrapped in His love
and knowing His forgiveness, is the place for us to repent of our sins,
make restoration where we can, restore our relationships and live at
peace.

Jesus can heal and restore our broken emotions. His yoke is easy, and
His burden is light.
