---
title: 2014-11-30 Advent Isa 2_1-5
type: document
---
## Stephen's sermon 30/11/14

Speaking of His return Jesus says that "No-one knows about that day or
hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father"
so we might think there is no point in concerning ourselves with it. Why
did the owner of the house not keep watch on the night his house was
broken into? -- He didn't know he was about to be burgled.

No one is going to sit up every night on the off-chance that their house
might get burgled. But if you get a tip-off that burglars are about,
then you would be wise to keep a sharp watch-out.

This is Jesus point. No-one is going to wait up for a burglar unless he
has reason to expect it. The issue Jesus is addressing in this series of
warnings and parables is that although we do not know with certainty
*when* Jesus will return, we can be certain He *will*. Furthermore,
observant Christians are in a position to get a tip-off when it is
imminent.

Jesus says His coming will be like "in the days before the flood, when
people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to
the day Noah entered the ark;" But whilst everyone else went about their
normal lives, Noah waited in the ark. -- Noah heeded God's warning
whereas the rest did not!

Jesus, along with many others in scripture, gives us clear signs of his
coming so the observant may be prepared:

> \"Now learn this lesson from the fig-tree: As soon as its twigs get
> tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near. Even so,
> when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the
> door." (vv 32-33).
>
> He said to the crowd: \"When you see a cloud rising in the west,
> immediately you say, 'It's going to rain,' and it does. And when the
> south wind blows, you say, 'It's going to be hot,' and it is.
> "Hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and
> the sky. How is it that you don't know how to interpret this present
> time?"(Lk 12:54-56)

Jesus urges us not to be ignorant of the times. Not to be blind to the
signs. Not to be caught unprepared like unbelievers who have no hope in
God. As people of God we should not be ignorant. There are things we can
and should know about God's activity in the world which should cause our
lives to be different.

Consider the parable of the widow and the unjust judge: why did she
persist in her petitioning the judge? Because she knew he wanted a quiet
life and so would give in to nagging. So what does Jesus tell us about
God so that we will not give up praying? He tells us that God is just
and merciful and quick to hear and respond to our prayers. We know
something about God that motivates us to keep praying -- God certainly
answers!

There are things we should know about God and what He is doing in the
world today that can motivate us to keep believing Him and maintain our
hope and joy. To unbelievers he will come like a thief in the night, but
to vigilant believers he will come following signs that awaken us to
anticipate Him.

Christmas is a time when this disparity between what believers know and
the blindness of the world is most extreme. The great majority of people
celebrate Christmas with office parties full of drunkenness and sexual
flirtations followed by more drunkenness, gluttony and materialism
interspersed with mindless television. The assumption is that God is
dead and Jesus is an irrelevant myth.

This is just how it was in the days of Noah. Meantime, God is steadily
moving His purposes on and one day, without warning, Jesus is going to
return. Although there is much we do not know for certain about that
event, we do have a huge amount of scripture describing it in various
ways. Matthew devotes two chapters to recalling Jesus' warnings about
that day, telling us to read the signs of the times and to be ready.

When that day comes John tells us that people will "hide in caves and
among the rocks of the mountains. They will call to the mountains and
the rocks, 'Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the
throne and from the wrath of the Lamb!'"

Now it may not be popular these days to talk about God's wrath, but not
talking about it does not make it disappear! And lest we think that
God's wrath was an old testament thing, John is explicit that this is
the wrath of the Lamb! Jesus' wrath against those who have stubbornly
rejected the light and chosen to walk in darkness. The decision made by
those who in this life choose to reject God will be respected by God on
judgement day. Their rejection will not be forcibly reversed, but rather
confirmed by Jesus' judgement.

We do no one any favours by toning down or shying away from these
truths. And lest we think that John got carried away and that Jesus was
not so harsh, we do well to recognise that Jesus said far more about
eternal judgement and the eternal sorrow of those who do not choose the
narrow way than any other individual in the bible.

Jesus said we should be ready. We should read the signs of the times.
Isaiah describes for us the times of Jesus' return. "All nations will
stream to God's kingdom" he says.

Now we all know that the media would have us believe that churches are
closing down and no intelligent person believes in God anymore, so I
thought it would be good to redress the balance a little and look at
what God is doing in the world today and see if we can discern the times
in which we live.

There is a greater world-wide focus on mission today than there has ever
been before. The most difficult to reach peoples are being reached in
ways and with an effectiveness never before seen. For instance hundreds
of thousands of Muslims in the most closed and oppressive counties are
turning to Jesus and Islamic extremists are becoming evangelists for
Jesus. The media is not reporting this, but it is well documented and is
happening right across the world, not just in local revivals.

The scriptures tell us that in the last days there will be a great
turning of Jews to Jesus. The largest population of Jews in the world is
found in the, USA where they make up nearly 2% of the population. Of
these 7 million Jews, ¼ are Christian. There are could well be more
Jewish Christians in the world than practicing English Christians!

We visited Nepal two years ago and were struck by how spiritually dark
that country is. It is said that there are more temples than houses and
more gods than people, yet it seemed like a place devoid of light and
hope. It is illegal for a Nepali to convert to Christianity. The few
churches there face hostile persecution from the Buddhist and Hindu
communities. Yet Nepal has the fastest growing Christian church in the
world. The church there looks just like the New Testament church full of
excitement and signs and wonders and healings along with mass
imprisonment and poverty. But Jesus is most definitely working mighty
things amongst that people.

All across the world the Kingdom of God is growing stronger. The
previously suppressed churches in Eastern Europe and China are growing
very strongly and the churches in South America have been experiencing
rapid growth for decades now.

In Africa many wonderful things are happening. As a result of the
witness of just one couple in Mozambique, 10,000 new churches have been
planted in that country with 1 million people coming to Christ. They
have documented testimonies from 450 people who have been raised from
the dead.

Along with the growth of the church, there has been a marked increase in
hostility and persecution of Christians with between 1-2000 Christians
being martyred each year for telling people about Jesus and around
160,000 a year being killed because of their Christian faith. Beyond
these figures are the huge number of Christians imprisoned for their
faith. Persecution against Christians is at an all-time.

All around the world today God is raising up thousands of ordinary
believers who are taking the gospel into the streets with healings and
miracles. There are hundreds of you-tube videos of healing taking place
on the streets of our towns and cities. There's a café called Café-Life
in Chester run by an ordinary Christian woman advertising free healings
and miracles along with coffee and cake. Every day they see healings and
people coming to Christ. Jesus is healing the sick and performing many
other miracles on a daily basis throughout this land and across the
world -- even in Anglican churches!

Now you may feel that amongst your friends and colleagues faith in
Christ is a rare quality, but nearly 1/3 of the world identifies
themselves as Christian whereas a mere 2% of the world's population
profess atheism. The vast majority of atheists live in Communist and
ex-communist countries and in those countries their numbers are rapidly
dwindling. Churches are growing in Eastern Europe and China at an
unprecedented rate.

Do not be intimidated this Christmas by the worldliness we are
surrounded by. Let us fix our eyes and hearts on our victorious risen
Christ who, as the living God, comes into our midst.

It is as Isaiah said, "In the last days the mountain of the LORD's
temple will be established as chief among the mountains; it will be
raised above the hills, and all nations will stream to it. Many peoples
will come and say, \"Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to
the house of the God of Jacob. He will teach us his ways, so that we may
walk in his paths.\" ... Come, O house of Jacob, let us walk in the
light of the LORD."
