---
title: 2015-07-12 2Cor_6
type: document
---
"As God's fellow-workers we urge you not to receive God's grace in vain.
For he says, \"In the time of my favour I heard you, and in the day of
salvation I helped you.\" I tell you, now is the time of God's favour,
now is the day of salvation.

We put no stumbling-block in anyone's path, so that our ministry will
not be discredited. Rather, as servants of God we commend ourselves in
every way: in great endurance; in troubles, hardships and distresses; in
beatings, imprisonments and riots; in hard work, sleepless nights and
hunger; in purity, understanding, patience and kindness; in the Holy
Spirit and in sincere love; in truthful speech and in the power of God;
with weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left; through
glory and dishonour, bad report and good report; genuine, yet regarded
as impostors; known, yet regarded as unknown; dying, and yet we live on;
beaten, and yet not killed; sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; poor, yet
making many rich; having nothing, and yet possessing everything.

We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians, and opened wide our hearts to
you. We are not withholding our affection from you, but you are
withholding yours from us. As a fair exchange---I speak as to my
children---open wide your hearts also.

Do not be yoked together with unbelievers. For what do righteousness and
wickedness have in common? Or what fellowship can light have with
darkness? What harmony is there between Christ and Belial? What does a
believer have in common with an unbeliever? What agreement is there
between the temple of God and idols? For we are the temple of the living
God. As God has said: \"I will live with them and walk among them, and I
will be their God, and they will be my people.\" \"Therefore come out
from them and be separate, says the Lord. Touch no unclean thing, and I
will receive you.\" \"I will be a Father to you, and you will be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.\"" (2Co 6:1-18 NIV)

**\
**

**2 Corinthians 6 -- Receiving God's grace.**

The Corinthians were visited by many traveling preachers who loved to be
heard and many were trying to undermine Paul's ministry as a means to
bolstering their own. It is so sad to read in the New Testament that
such things were going on even in the first-century church.

But the fact that they were means we have instruction and example in the
letters to help us face similar situations. A consequence of these
not-so-good visiting preachers was that the Corinthians became used to
hearing a whole lot of teaching, but without being changed by it. They
became greedy listeners but poor doers.

This is most definitely still an issue today. I have friends who are
forever going to this conference or that conference seeking to be
inspired and instructed in ministry, but they never seem to actually
take the risk of using their new-found skills; they always need to go to
just one more conference before they are ready. Whether you are a
dead-keen type that goes off to every possible conference or one who is
content to listen to the weekly sermon at church, we so easily became
greedy listeners but poor doers.

None of us are immune from "receiving the grace of God in vain" as Paul
puts it. "Now" he says, "is the acceptable time; now is the day of
salvation". If we hear something of God that promises what we need, we
should be careful to respond immediately and follow it through to a
proper conclusion.

How many times do we need to hear God speak to us before we respond?
Scripture warns us that to ignore God's voice hardens our hearts and
makes it all the more difficult for us to hear God and to respond
positively to Him.

Now is the time to respond. Let us not receive the grace of God in vain.

Paul then moves on to present his ninth defence of his ministry in this
letter. These passages may sound arrogant or self-inflating, "In all
things we commend ourselves" but I think they are evidence of a clear
conscience. Paul has nothing to hide, whether good or bad. He doesn't
make vague claims that no-one can verify; he just lays it all out and
anyone who disagrees can challenge it.

People often make bold claims about the amount of support there is for
their opinion, but rarely are such claims substantiated with concrete
examples. Christians should not be like this; we should be plain and
open with nothing to hide, and honest if we have a particular agenda.
Paul is very open and straight forward in this letter. He exposes his
own fears and disappointments with the Corinthians and is plain about
the lengths he has gone in sharing God's love with them.

Openness between Christians is a vital part of discipleship. Paul is
keenly aware that discipleship is not simply a matter of knowledge.
Hearing the gospel, and even agreeing that it is true is not the same as
being transformed by it. Consequently Christian ministry depends
significantly upon openness and transparency in our lives. If our lives
do not demonstrate our faith, then we have received the grace of God in
vain. As ministers of the gospel, whether in teaching from the pulpit or
sharing a conversation with a friend, we need to share ourselves; both
the good and the bad. We should neither try to bolster our image by
reporting only the best, nor try to identify with others by majoring on
our failures. We need to be as straight forwardly honest as we can. We
are sinners in whom God works mighty goodness. Jesus said, "let your
light so shine before men that they may see your good works and give
glory to your Father in heaven."

If all we ever present is ideas and truths and good morals, we reduce
discipleship to teaching. But the great commission is not simply to
teach *knowledge*, but to teach *obedience*. Obedience is taught most
effectively through demonstration. By far the biggest impact we have had
amongst the churches in Liberia has been in going out onto the streets
healing the sick and seeing lives transformed through the presence of
Jesus.

No amount of teaching compares with a few hours of demonstration. The
most inspiring sermon about ministry is insignificant compared to seeing
someone being touched by Jesus as you share the good news with them.

Paul knew his life demonstrated the Gospel and that was far more
powerful than eloquent exhortations. So as Christians seeking to share
our faith, we need to share our lives and not just our beliefs. But Paul
then goes on to appeal to the Corinthians to open *their* hearts to him.

We who wish to grow in Christ must also have open hearts towards one
another, and especially towards those who are helping us to grow. There
are of course aspects of our relationship with God that are intensely
personal, but our walk with God should not be entirely private. On the
contrary, we are urged to share our walk with God openly with one
another, encouraging and supporting each other.

> "encourage one another and build one another up"
>
> " stir up one another to love and good works "
>
> "Let each of us please his neighbour for his good, to build him up."
>
> "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing
> one another in all wisdom "

And so Paul makes his appeal: "open wide your hearts to us". It is the
natural response to the love of God. If you know God's love for you, why
would you want to keep that hidden? We all struggle with feelings of
failure or disappointment with ourselves, but God puts that aside and
says, "I know all about that, but I love you anyway!"

People say that boasting is bad, but the Psalmist says,

> "My soul makes its boast in the Lord; let the afflicted hear and be
> glad."

Let us open our hearts to one another and make our boast in the Lord.
Yes, I am guilty of all those things we mention in the confession, but
my goodness! God has washed me clean and clothed me in His
righteousness! I stand before Him without guilt or shame and receive
from Him the most wholesome welcome. He hears my prayers and calms my
fears. Let any who are here hear my boast and take heart, for you too
can know His love.

Hearts that are closed cannot receive the grace of God. Open your
hearts, one to another. Share your troubles and triumphs and let us pray
for each other.
