---
title: 2015-10-25 Mark 10_46 Bartimaeus
type: document
---
"Then they came to Jericho. As Jesus and his disciples, together with a
large crowd, were leaving the city, a blind man, Bartimaeus (that is,
the Son of Timaeus), was sitting by the roadside begging. 47 When he
heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to shout, \"Jesus, Son of
David, have mercy on me!\" 48 Many rebuked him and told him to be quiet,
but he shouted all the more, \"Son of David, have mercy on me!\" 49
Jesus stopped and said, \"Call him.\" So they called to the blind man,
\"Cheer up! On your feet! He's calling you.\" 50 Throwing his cloak
aside, he jumped to his feet and came to Jesus. 51 \"What do you want me
to do for you?\" Jesus asked him. The blind man said, \"Rabbi, I want to
see.\" 52 \"Go,\" said Jesus, \"your faith has healed you.\" Immediately
he received his sight and followed Jesus along the road." (Mr 10:46-52
NIV)

"7 This is what the LORD says: \"Sing with joy for Jacob; shout for the
foremost of the nations. Make your praises heard, and say, 'O LORD, save
your people, the remnant of Israel.' 8 See, I will bring them from the
land of the north and gather them from the ends of the earth. Among them
will be the blind and the lame, expectant mothers and women in labour; a
great throng will return. 9 They will come with weeping; they will pray
as I bring them back. I will lead them beside streams of water on a
level path where they will not stumble, because I am Israel's father,
and Ephraim is my firstborn son." (Jer 31:7-9 NIV)

# Lessons about Prayer from Bartimaeus

Prayer will always have elements of mystery that we cannot fathom. But
Bartimaeus gives us much encouragement and some helpful pointers.

## The beginnings of faith

Bartimaeus is not a follower of Jesus. He's just a poor blind beggar
crying out for pity on the main road between Jericho and Jerusalem. But
he overhears people talking about Jesus and how he has healed so many.
He realises that this Jesus may be able to heal him. So he gets people
to tell him all they can about Jesus. As he listens his understanding
and faith grow and a desire to meet Jesus takes hold of his heart.

This is the beginning of prayer; being moved by the possibility of God
acting in response to your prayer. Without that hope there is no prayer.
Even those who claim to have no faith usually have some faint hope when
things get really bad that maybe if they pray God will help them.

But if we are to develop an effective prayer life we need more than a
faint hope that maybe God might answer us. We need to do all we can to
stimulate our faith that God hears and answers our prayer. Reading
biographies, testimonies and articles about the way God is working in
the world can be a great help.

Sharing our own stories with one another and giving thanks to God is a
great way of stirring our faith. After delivering the man known as
Legion Jesus told him to go back to his town and tell everyone what had
been done for him. The next time Jesus visited the area the whole town
came out to hear Him. The scriptures are consistent in urging us to give
constant thanks to God, yet this is something that most of us are rather
poor at. Jesus healed ten lepers but only one returned to thank Him.

We need to learn to gossip the gospel; to tell our friends and
neighbours the little ways in which God encourages us and helps us in
our daily lives, and where we have bigger answers to prayer be bold to
share them and make sure that others can share with us in giving thanks
to God.

Sharing with a friend what God has been doing in our lives may plant a
seed that grows into faith. This is what happened for Bartimaeus.

## A growing desire

Bartimaeus had never even thought about healing. It was simply not on
his radar. His desires were focused on obtaining enough money, food and
clothes to keep himself as comfortable as could be expected in his
condition. But on hearing about Jesus a new desire was born; something
never before dreamt of -- the possibility of healing. Not all disabled
people want to be healed. If you have grown up with disability, like my
son Daniel, it becomes a part of who you are and it can be very
difficult and even frightening, to imagine life without that disability.
But Bartimaeus dared to imagine and hope for a new life as a seeing
member of society.

When we believe in Jesus who is alive and promises to be always with us
and who loves us with an everlasting love, it becomes possible to dream
of things being different. As we get to know God's character we can
imagine what His Kingdom might look like in some area of life that
concerns us. Bartimaeus heard that Jesus was proclaiming the Kingdom of
God and demonstrating it with countless healings. He heard of many other
blind people whom Jesus had healed. The possibility of the same thing
happening for him became a growing desire.

What do you dream of when you read the Gospels and see the Kingdom of
God being expressed in so many wonderful ways? Do you let the Gospels
inspire hope for you or have you become too used to passing it off as
ancient history? Unless God-inspired desires grow into deep longings in
our hearts we will never give ourselves to persistent prayer.

## Crying out to God

Bartimaeus began to cry out to Jesus to have mercy on him. He hoped that
Jesus would hear him over the noise of the crowds.

Nothing would change unless he could get Jesus' attention so he started
to cry out in a loud voice to attract Jesus' attention. But the more he
cried out, the more people told him to be quiet. But Bartimaeus would
not be put off, and when Jesus heard his cry, He tells the people to
bring him over.

What does this teach us? Firstly, that far from being offended or put
off by persistent prayer, Jesus is attentive to it; persistence pleases
Him. Jesus sees faith in such persistence. He rewards persistence.

So should we keep crying out to God with a loud voice? How do we know
when to stop? Well, no! The situation is different for us. Jesus has
gone to the cross, risen from the dead, ascended into heaven and poured
out the Holy Spirit. A new and living way has been opened for us to
bring our requests to God our Father, so that Jesus says to His
disciples, "In that day you will no longer ask me anything. Very truly I
tell you, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name."

It is much easier for us to present our requests before God than it was
for Bartimaeus. But it is not easy for us to truly believe that our
Father will hear and answer our prayer. There is a process for us, just
as there was a process for Bartimaeus. For us the process is not one of
crying out in a loud voice, but of searching out and dwelling on the
promises of God until we come to a place of confident assurance that our
Father is pleased to welcome our approach, eager to hear our request and
will be quick to grant us our answer.

Such a journey, bringing us to a place of confident assurance, is not
easily made, and Satan will do all he can to distract and discourage us
along the way. We may even find fellow Christian's telling us that what
we are asking is unreasonable; that we should just accept the situation
as it is. Bartimaeus would not be put off, and neither should we be. The
Gospel promises are given to encourage us in coming boldly to the grown
of grace for help in time of need.

## Burning our Boats

When Bartimaeus received his summons to come to Jesus, Mark gives an
interesting little detail, "throwing his cloak aside, he jumped to his
feet..."

The summons to Jesus is enough to fill Bartimaeus with joy. His joy
started before he was healed. He knew that to be heard was to be healed.
His immediate joy was the evidence of his faith; faith that is confident
of things hoped for, assured of things as yet unseen. We know when we
have true faith because it fills us with joy. Paul prays for the Roman's
"Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit." This is
what Bartimaeus experienced, that made him jump up and throw his cloak
aside. He knew he would be healed and would not need his tatty old cloak
any more. The things that had given him necessary comfort up 'till now,
were now a hindrance.

This is in marked contrast to the rich young ruler who was unwilling to
cast his possessions aside to follow Jesus. As Jesus said, it is much
harder for the rich to come to Jesus than the poor.

As we dwell on the Gospel promises of answered pray and ask God to lead
us and guide us in our praying, if we persist, we will come in time to
this place of joy and peace in believing; the settled conviction that we
can lay our request before God and receive the promised answer. This may
take only a few seconds, or some minutes or it may take many days or
months. But until we have this joy and peace in believing we do not have
the kind of faith that pleases God and receives its answer.

## Making our Request

So Bartimaeus finds himself standing before Jesus. Whether he realises
it or not, he is standing before God his creator; the creator of all
things. Jesus knows far better than Bartimaeus what his needs are. When
Jesus met the woman at the well He told her what the issues were in her
life. Jesus does not need to ask Bartimaeus anything, but He does.

Jesus asks the man what he wants from him. Jesus never pushes himself on
people. Those who ask for healing he heals and sends on their way. Those
who ask for the Kingdom or eternal life he invites to follow Him. He
does not make assumptions about what people want from Him.

Jesus encourages us to come to Him with specific requests. He's OK with
general blessing; He blessed the children that came to Him. But He also
delights in our specific requests. Some people object, "But what if we
ask something that isn't God's will?" Even when James and John asked for
prominent positions for themselves in the Kingdom, Jesus did not
reprimand them, but granted as much as He was able.

It is foolish for us to advise God as to the means of answering our
prayer, but it is pleasing to Him when we make our requests specific. He
will bless us over and beyond our narrow perceptions of our needs, but
specific answers to specific prayers are a powerful means of encouraging
our faith.

Bartimaeus says he wants to see. What a wonderful prayer. "Lord, let me
see." One of the principle signs of the Kingdom is the blind receiving
their sight. Although this is certainly a literal sign of the Kingdom,
it is primarily symbolic of the spiritually blind being transformed by
the Holy Spirit so they might turn from their worldly ways to seek the
living God. It is our blindness to the realities of God that make us so
vulnerable to temptation and foolish distractions. We are easily
preoccupied with the things we can easily see and neglect the greater
things that we can only perceive with the help of the Holy Spirit.
"Lord, I want to see" is a prayer that we all do well to bring before
the throne of God.

## Your faith has healed you

Having presented his request, Jesus very simply grants it. There is no
fanfare, no fuss, no instruction in godliness; just the simple "It is
done." But simple as it is, it's not quite that simple is it? Jesus
actually says, "Your faith has healed you." Surely that is wrong! Jesus
should have said "I have healed you" or "God has healed you." But no! He
says "Your faith has healed you."

What does Jesus mean by this? Bartimaeus knows perfectly well that it
was Jesus that healed him, and that in fact is Jesus' point. Bartimaeus
firmly believed that Jesus could and would heal him if he got the
opportunity to ask. This faith resulted in his healing. It was
Bartimaeus' faith, not Jesus' faith that was the issue. Jesus never
lacked faith for his ability to heal, and yet he was unable to heal many
in Nazareth. The problem was not Jesus' faith but the lack of faith in
Nazareth. And so Jesus commends Bartimaeus for his faith.

It is true that God often acts and Jesus often healed even where the
recipient has little or no faith. Those whom Jesus raised from the dead
could not exercise their own faith! I have seen some notable healings
even where the person receiving the healing claimed not to believe in
divine healing. Yet Jesus always commends those who have confident
faith, such as the woman with the flow of blood and the leper, saying
that their faith has healed them.

Let us be clear. There is a world of difference between the resigned
faith of the man with the demonised son, who said, "If you can please
help me" and Bartimaeus who knew for sure that Jesus could and would
heal him. It is too easy for us to pray with resignation, "Well, I've
prayed. All I can do now is hope for the best." That is not the kind of
faith that achieves break through. God promises to grant the persistent
prayer of faith.

To receive answers to prayer it is not enough that we simply ask. We
have to ask in confident faith. Many Christian's don't like the idea
that our own faith may limit what we receive from God, yet the
scriptures are consistent on this issue.

In the previous chapter (9v23) we see Jesus saying to the father of the
demonised boy, \"Everything is possible for him who believes." To the
centurion Jesus said, \"Go! It will be done just as you believed it
would.\" (Mt 8:13). To the blind men Jesus said, \"According to your
faith will it be done to you\"; (Mt 9:28-30).

In the next chapter of Mark Jesus makes the startling statement:

> "Have faith in God. I tell you the truth, if anyone says to this
> mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt in his
> heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for
> him. Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe
> that you have received it, and it will be yours." (Mr 11:22-24 NIV)

We need faith before we can even ask God, but we also need faith to
receive answers to our prayers. Remember, Jesus said \"According to your
faith it will be done to you\". If we want to receive answers to prayer
we must be confident and courageous and stubborn in our faith that God
hears us and promises to grant our requests; even when faced with
repeated disappointments.

The writer to the Hebrews says we are to imitate those who through faith
and patience have inherited the promises. The promises God gives us are
not inherited by giving them a go and giving up when we get
disheartened. They are inherited by those who are like the man in the
parable that finds a treasure and sells all he has to buy the field.

But such faith is hard won and difficult to maintain. We are much better
at dwelling on disappointment than we are at building up our faith.

## No Strings attached

Jesus says to Bartimaeus, "Go." Later Jesus instructs His disciples to
make disciples teaching people to follow Jesus. But Jesus is happy to
heal this man and send him on his way. There are no strings attached to
healing; there are no strings attached to God hearing and answering
prayer. Anyone may pray and anyone may receive an answer. God is loving
and merciful to all. Healing is a sign of the Kingdom. Healing plays an
important role in opening people's hearts to the possibility of God
being involved in their lives. But this does not constitute
discipleship, or indicate salvation.

Answering prayer is God's means of evangelism. It is something He does
without our assistance. The reason that so many people pray despite
never going to church or having faith in Jesus is because God answers
prayer. By answering prayer He keeps people's hearts open to the
possibility of God having an interest in their lives. This universal
grace that God shows to all is something we can and should build upon in
talking to people about Jesus. It stops people from becoming completely
materialistic and self-dependent.

## Following Jesus

Although Jesus told Bartimaeus to go, he didn't go. He followed
-"Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus along the road."

Jesus healed countless people and sent them on their way. He taught
countless people and sent them on their way. And you can be sure that of
all the seeds that were planted, much would turn out to be fruitless.
But some of the seed will have fallen on good ground which the Father
would water and in time the seed would bear the fruits of discipleship.
Bartimaeus was healed and sent on his way -- but he chose to follow. The
seed which had been sown through hearing the stories about Jesus had
grown into a desire to meet Jesus, and then into confidence that Jesus
would heal him.

On being healed, Bartimaeus didn't go home, he followed Jesus. We don't
know how far he followed, but perhaps he became a disciple. Perhaps the
rich young ruler also came to his senses and decided to follow Jesus. We
do know that 120 disciples waited in Jerusalem for the Holy Spirit and
no doubt many other were also intent on following Jesus as disciples.

Where are you on your journey of faith? The tragedy of Israel is that
they were and are so used to thinking of themselves as God's people,
that when God came to them in the person of Jesus, His words of life
could not penetrate their hearts. We face the same danger. We can be so
used to hearing the Gospel accounts that what we hear no longer moves
our hearts. We can so easily let the words pass over us with a sense of
familiarity that leaves us untouched. This is both tragic and alarming.
How can Christ be formed in us if we are immune to His word?

What will you do with Bartimaeus? Will you accompany him as he follows
Jesus to Jerusalem, or will you go home untouched and unmoved?

Will you dare to believe that God can answer your prayers?

Will you dwell on the Gospel promises until faith is born for God to
hear you and grant your request?

Will you demonstrate your faith by persisting in your request until you
receive your answer?

Will you ask Him to open your eyes, so you can follow Jesus, letting Him
bring direction and fruitfulness to your life?

# Notes

-   Faith starts with hearing and telling stories.

-   Hope for God to intervene arises

-   Crying out to be heard

    -   Faith that God will hear us

-   Bartimaeus would not be put off -- Jesus was not offended!

    -   Faith that God will answer us

-   The joy that precedes receiving

-   Making our request -- being specific

-   Let me see!

-   Faith that obtains its answer

    -   Little faith gets little answers

    -   "If you can, please help" \> "Everything is poss. to him who\...

    -   Centurion: \"Go! It will be done just as you believed it
        would.\"

    -   Blind men: \"According to your faith will it be done to you\"

    -   Fig tree: "whatever you ask for in prayer, believe \..."

-   Go! - No strings attached

-   Following Jesus.
