---
title: 2015-05-10 Joh 15_9-17
type: document
---
Joh 15:9-17 "As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Now remain
in my love. If you obey my commands, you will remain in my love, just as
I have obeyed my Father's commands and remain in his love. I have told
you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete.
My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you. Greater love
has no-one than this, that he lay down his life for his friends. You are
my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you servants,
because a servant does not know his master's business. Instead, I have
called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have
made known to you. You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed
you to go and bear fruit---fruit that will last. Then the Father will
give you whatever you ask in my name. This is my command: Love each
other."

1Jo 5:1-6 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God,
and everyone who loves the father loves his child as well. This is how
we know that we love the children of God: by loving God and carrying out
his commands. This is love for God: to obey his commands. And his
commands are not burdensome, for everyone born of God overcomes the
world. This is the victory that has overcome the world, even our faith.
Who is it that overcomes the world? Only he who believes that Jesus is
the Son of God. This is the one who came by water and blood---Jesus
Christ. He did not come by water only, but by water and blood. And it is
the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.

# Message:

"Remain in my love, by obeying my commands, then my joy will be in you.
My command is that you love each other as I have loved you. Then you are
my friends. For I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit that
will last. Then the Father will give you whatever you ask in my name."

Love for God is measured by our obedience to His commands, especially to
love one another.

# Treasure Hunting

Gordon and I have been meeting each week for over a year now to look at
the gospels together and pray. Jesus' said that His sheep hear His
voice, and in our reading today:

> "You are my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you
> servants, because a servant does not know his master's business.
> Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from
> my Father I have made known to you. You did not choose me, but I chose
> you and appointed you to go and bear fruit---fruit that will last.
> Then the Father will give you whatever you ask in my name."

We believe that we are His friends and called by Him to be fruitful in
His service. So we have been asking Jesus to show us what He is doing in
our community, and to lead us to people that we can bring God's love to,
especially people we would not normally meet. He has led us, by stages,
to go treasure hunting for people He wants us to speak to. It sounds
crazy, but our experience has been amazing. We simply ask God to give us
the clues, which we just grab out of the air and write down. When we
have half-a-dozen or so each we go out and search for the clues that
will lead us to the person. We look first for a location and then for
the person.

This is what has happened:

Following lunch at the Source Café in Buxton we wrote down our clues
which were:

Park, Yellow stripe, Love, Tall-black boots and a few others. We
searched the Pavilion park and found no-one, so we wandered down Spring
Gardens until I noticed a shop with very distinctive yellow-striped
paintwork. In the window Gordon spotted a cushion with "Love"
embroidered on it. Outside was a parking bay. We had found our location
matching three clues: Yellow stripe, Love and Park. We then accosted the
first person wearing tall black boots. This was a lady with her partner
and a child in a push-chair. We asked if she had any need for prayer,
and she turned to her partner and said, "You do don't you." He told us
about a long-term skin problem. We prayed for healing for him and he
said he was interested in getting to know God. Gordon just couldn't
believe what had just happened!

A little while later, I was visiting a Christian friend in London, and
told her of our experience. Katy wanted to have a go, so we had lunch in
a café, wrote down our clues and before we left offered to pray for the
café owner, who was very glad to receive prayer for his new business.

Our clues were: \"Groceries, Heather, Honey and Mascara, Dressed in
green, Insomnia, black lady with a big hair-do, and Frida."

We couldn't find any heather plants in the various flower shops so went
to Waitrose for the \"groceries\" clue. Outside was a man selling the
Big Issue, so we offered to pray for him, and it turned out he had
hepatitis. After we had prayed for his healing an Egyptian man
approached and asked if we would pray for him. Eventually we managed to
get into Waitrose, where we found the last jar of Heather Honey. We had
found our location with Groceries, Heather and Honey. Standing on the
other side of the aisle was a lady dressed in green wearing mascara. We
had found our treasure!

She was a Japanese lady, and this was her first day out having been very
ill with the first attack of flue she dad ever had. She was very fearful
of her health, because she was soon to turn 50 and someone had said to
her that her health would deteriorate when she turned 50. There in the
aisle we prayed for her.

We had "black lady with a big hair-do, Insomnia, and Frida" still to
find. We couldn't find her so went home. A few days later Katy emailed
me. She had found the black lady on the checkout at Waitrose. She had
her name badge on and Katy could see her name wasn't Frida. But she
asked if she had insomnia, and if the name Frida meant anything. Yes she
did suffer from insomnia, and Frida was her favourite name. Katy prayed
for her.

A few days after that Katy emailed me, "I caught up again with the lass
in Waitrose who I had prayed for about insomnia. Her face lit up when
she saw me -- no sleep problems since I had prayed for her...Also she
reiterated how important the name Frida was to her, she said if she had
a daughter she would call her Frida. Saw her again today and she's still
happy. Not sure what next step is, but she knows there has been divine
intervention and I keep telling her God loves her."

On Thursday this week Gordon and I went back to Buxton and invited Chris
to join us. Our clues were: Jo/Joe as a possible name, French, blue
coat, sharp pains, grape, fruit, trees, green, coffee, guitar in a black
case and Eifel tower.

We searched the travel agents and charity shops for French and Eifel
tower but found nothing. Then we spotted a bar called Jo Jo, which had a
plaster French waiter outside. We decided this was our location. Within
seconds, Gordon saw an acquaintance in a blue coat go past and accosted
him. I asked him if he suffered from sharp pains. He did, as a result of
a recent operation. He asked us to pray for deliverance from alcoholism.
That crossed four clues off our list.

We then moved on and found a shop called grape tree, which was full
of fruit, all painted green near a coffee shop. We had found our next
location matching 5 more clues. We were looking for a guitar in a black
case. So I prayed, \"Lord send us a black guitar\" and within seconds a
woman carrying a guitar in a black case came round the corner. She was
evidently in a hurry and would not stop but we managed to tell her God
had led us to her before she hurried off. Who knows what that short
encounter might mean to her?

We never did find the Eifel tower, but we had yet another amazing time.

I wanted to tell you these stories to encourage you that God is at work
here amongst us, and if we are crazy enough to take Him at His word, He
will meet us. Gordon and I simply read the gospels and decided to give
it a go.
