---
title: 2015-08-23 2Cor 13
type: document
---
2 Corinthians 13

This will be my third visit to you. \"Every matter must be established
by the testimony of two or three witnesses.\" I already gave you a
warning when I was with you the second time. I now repeat it while
absent: On my return I will not spare those who sinned earlier or any of
the others, since you are demanding proof that Christ is speaking
through me.

He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful among you. For to be
sure, he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by God's power.
Likewise, we are weak in him, yet by God's power we will live with him
to serve you.

Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith; test yourselves.
Do you not realise that Christ Jesus is in you--- unless, of course, you
fail the test? And I trust that you will discover that we have not
failed the test.

Now we pray to God that you will not do anything wrong. Not that people
will see that we have stood the test but that you will do what is right
even though we may seem to have failed. For we cannot do anything
against the truth, but only for the truth. We are glad whenever we are
weak but you are strong; and our prayer is for your perfection.

This is why I write these things when I am absent, that when I come I
may not have to be harsh in my use of authority--- the authority the
Lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.

Finally, brothers, good-bye. Aim for perfection, listen to my appeal, be
of one mind, live in peace. And the God of love and peace will be with
you. Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the saints send their
greetings. May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all." (2Co 13:1-14
NIV)

**\
**

**Meaning.**

Throughout the letter there have been references to members of the
Corinthian church who were careless about sin and were continuing in
jealousy and contentions with one another, and some were even being
sexually immoral. It seems that the false teachers that the Corinthians
were so taken with took a pretty relaxed view of sin which Paul did not
share. Paul warns them that he will certainly challenge this behaviour
when he next visits. He seems to be threatening divine punishment since
he claims that his actions will prove that Christ is speaking through
him.

Next Paul likens Christ's weakness on the cross being transformed into
His powerful work amongst them with his own weakness being empowered by
God's power. Although Paul's desire is for their wellbeing and blessing,
for those who act disgracefully in the church, the power of Christ will
be manifest in punishment.

The behaviour of some amongst them is such that Paul questions their
being in Christ at all. He urges them to test themselves. Do they have
true repentance for sins; true faith in the Lord Jesus; and a sincere
desire to live the life of a Christian, and to be like the Son of God?

The proof of their piety was to be arrived at by a faithful examination
of their own hearts and lives; by a diligent comparison of their views
and feelings with the word of God; and especially by making trial of it
in life. The best way to prove our piety is to subject it to actual
trial in the various duties and responsibilities of life. Do you strive
to live as Christ in the world, or to hide Him away so you can do things
your way?

In the next paragraph Paul makes it clear that he does not relish the
thought of proving his apostolic authority through punishing sinners,
but rather that he is left without an opportunity for such proof by
their obedience. He will never hope for an opportunity to inflict
discipline or punishment just to prove his apostolic authority.

That is why Paul has written -- so that there may no occasion for him to
use his apostolic authority for punishment ("tearing you down") rather
than building them up.

Paul concludes with an appeal for their being united in God's love and
peace. Nothing is more delightful for a Christian to know than God's
love and peace, but living in conflict with other believers drives that
presence away.

**Preach**

We have come to the last of our series going through Paul's second
letter to the Corinthians. His first letter deals exclusively with
issues that have arisen within the church, but this second letter is
much more concerned with issues that have arisen from without -- that is
the influence of false teachers.

These teachers have been teaching a false gospel of triumphalism, where
every trouble is supposedly overcome by the supernatural activity of the
Spirit. This has served to undermine Paul's authority, since he has
himself clearly suffered innumerable troubles which have not been
miraculously removed by the Spirit. Although Paul's ministry has
consistently been attended with miraculous signs and healings, he has at
the same time taught that Christ was crucified, and that we are to
follow in His footsteps -- always leading to ultimate triumph, yes, but
often through great persecutions and difficulties.

Paul's defence of his apostolic ministry has been to make much of his
sufferings and weaknesses alongside Christ's mighty power at work
through his weakness. He has reminded them in many ways of the evidence
of his Christ-given authority amongst them, even going so far as
mentioning the amazing revelations he has had. Yet he will not budge
from his position that the Christian life includes sufferings and
troubles that we are sometimes not delivered from, and that we must find
the grace of God to walk through. "My grace is sufficient for you, for
my power is made perfect in weakness."

In this concluding chapter Paul returns to the matter of sin within the
church. If nothing else persuades them of his Christ given authority,
then his dealing with these issues when he comes to visit should seal
the matter.

We see here one of the most difficult issues facing church leaders and
those overseeing churches -- that of dealing with sin within the
congregation. Sometimes the issue relates to one or two people and can
be dealt with privately but it is much more difficult when it affects
the church more widely. And often even personal issues have wider
ramifications.

Following his previous visit the leaders at Corinth had, under Paul's
guidance, successfully dealt with bringing discipline to a man who had
been involved in serious sexual misconduct and he had been restored to
fellowship. But there were now a range of serious problems in the church
which the leadership seemed unwilling to deal with.

Perhaps they had been persuaded by the false teachers that Paul was
being far too harsh and that no action needed to be taken. Perhaps they
were even condoning the behaviour of those that Paul said should be
disciplined. Consequently Paul's authority as an apostle was being
further challenged. And so Paul says, "On my return I will not spare
those who sinned earlier or any of the others, since you are demanding
proof that Christ is speaking through me."

On the face of it this sounds like a control freak throwing his weight
around, but if we read this carefully we see that it is not. For a
start, Paul's genuine love for these people can hardly be questioned
when one considers the sacrifices and sufferings he has been through on
their behalf. His love and compassion shine through his letters.
Secondly, he threatens them, not with his own actions, but with those of
Jesus Christ. This is the whole basis of his apostolic defence -- that
Christ speaks and acts through him.

If they demand proof of his apostolic authority amongst them, they will
get it when he is amongst them and the power of Christ comes in
judgement of their sin. This is not something Paul relishes one bit. The
whole purpose of his letter has been to warn them off, to persuade them
to return to faithfulness to Christ and so avert judgement.

Paul reminds them that although Jesus died in weakness upon the cross,
He is now amongst them in power. The Corinthians have already known the
power of Christ amongst them both in healing and other miraculous signs,
but also in discipline and even sickness and death due to gross
disobedience to the Spirit.

> "For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat
> and drink judgment on themselves. That is why many among you are weak
> and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep. But if we were more
> discerning with regard to ourselves, we would not come under such
> judgment. Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we
> are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with
> the world." (1 Cor 11)

This is not a subject often preached about, but the New Testament
records a number of instances where sickness and death resulted from
disregard for God. The writer to the Hebrews says, "It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God." And earlier in this
letter Paul writes, "Knowing, therefore, the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men".

God disciplines those whom He loves so that we might enjoy the blessing
of living righteous lives rather than in the misery of disobedience and
unbelief. Sometimes if we harden our hearts against God speaking to us
He uses other people to bring discipline to our lives. This is not a
judgemental God threatening us if we don't make the mark, but the loving
actions of our compassionate heavenly Father. Those in authority are
often an instrument of God's discipline of His children.

Christian leaders have a particularly onerous God-given responsibility
-- the care of people's souls. They also have a responsibility to guard
the flock and they will have to give an account to God for how they have
done so.

Leading any church is a challenging and difficult task. Bringing
leadership, direction and discipline to what is basically a voluntary
organisation is always difficult. The task is made even more difficult
when church members forget that the church belongs to Christ and think
it belongs to them.

It is a sobering thought that we do well to consider: "How would we
react if some upstart carpenter's son came in and started throwing his
weight around, telling us that our church was missing the mark, and that
what the Father really wanted was X Y and Z"?

Would we welcome such clear direction from God or would we resent the
upset to our familiar routine?

Paul faced leadership issues, and he faced them unflinchingly. Godly
church leadership is not about keeping people happy, it is not
men-pleasing but God-pleasing.

When we lose sight of the fact that the church, *our church*, belongs to
Christ and that His agenda is the only one that matters, Church
leadership becomes exceedingly difficult; it becomes men-pleasing. Let
us each search our hearts and do our best to ensure that Hilary, and
others that lead amongst us, can fulfil their leadership role without
constantly struggling against our own self-interests. It is up to us to
give them the authority they need to lead us effectively.

Paul concludes on a more positive note. "Aim for perfection, listen to
my appeal, be of one mind, live in peace."

He wants to turn their attention away from these arguments about
apostolic prowess to the simple goals of discipleship and unity. "Aim
for perfection." Aim at Christlikeness; both in boldness of faith, but
also in graceful endurance through difficulties.

Pauls concluding words are what we now know as "the grace".

> "May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
> fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all."

It is a clear statement of the Trinitarian faith of the early church --
the unity and distinctiveness of the Godhead; each member a person with
special qualities. Jesus brings to us the grace of God -- the
extraordinary mercy and forgives of God through His death and
resurrection. It is God's love made present in our lives.

God the Father is the seat and source of that love. The Father's love is
so evident throughout the bible, yet it is constantly frustrated by the
hard-heartedness of God's chosen people. God aches with love for us, but
so often we resist Him because of our hard hearts.

It is the work and fellowship of the Holy Spirit that takes away that
hardness of heart. He gives us a heart of flesh in exchange for our
natural hearts of stone, so that we can say "Yes" to God and receive His
grace and love. It is in our fellowship with the Holy Spirit that our
hearts can be changed and faith is born and promises become precious to
us.

In fellowship with Him we find courage to take risks and perseverance to
press on. He ministers to us the grace and love of God so that we are
lifted out of lives of ordinary human experience into the extraordinary
life of a believer.

> "May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
> fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all."
