---
title: 2015-03-08 1Cor1_18-25 Foolishness of the cross  (1)
type: document
---
2015-03-08

1 Corinthians 1:18-25

"For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing,
but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. For it is written:
\"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the
intelligent I will frustrate.\" Where is the wise man? Where is the
scholar? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish
the wisdom of the world? For since in the wisdom of God the world
through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the
foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe. Jews demand
miraculous signs and Greeks look for wisdom, but we preach Christ
crucified: a stumbling-block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, but to
those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God
and the wisdom of God. For the foolishness of God is wiser than man's
wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than man's strength." (1Co
1:18-25 NIV)

## The Message

A Jewish scholar, Jacob Neusner, wrote a book in 1993 entitled "A Rabbi
talks with Jesus" which is a very sympathetic and insightful commentary
on the Sermon on the Mount, in which he says that in nearly everything
Jesus said and did was an implicit claim to be God incarnate. Neuser is
seriously impressed by Jesus but ultimately concludes that he was not
the Messiah partly because he views Jesus' teaching as a departure from
the Law and partly because he did not bring world peace.

Neusner provides an example of the problem that Paul describes: "in the
wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him". For
reasons we may not be able to fully understand, God in His wisdom, has
hidden Himself from discovery through human wisdom.

This is such an important point, and one which causes a great deal of
offence. It exposes our stubborn pride and self-sufficiency. Wise man
stamps his feet and says, "Well if it isn't reasonable, how can you
expect me to believe. That's just ridiculous." But that is the point:
God is not reasonable, in the sense that He is subject to our powers of
reason. Elsewhere, Paul says,

"Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom andÂ knowledge of God! How
unsearchable his judgments, and his paths beyond tracing out! Who has
known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?" (Rom 11:33).

It is the height of arrogance for us to say, "Unless God conforms to my
understanding, I will not believe." God has made it clear that He hides
himself from scholarly investigation and worldly wisdom and
philosophical reasoning. Even Christian reasoning fails to capture God's
wisdom. During my own studies I have read some of the greatest Christian
thinkers, such as Augustine of Hippo, Thomas Aquinas, John Calvin and
Jonathan Edwards. These great men, along with a host of others, tried to
apply philosophical reasoning to understanding God's sovereignty and
they got themselves into a mighty tangle. They each tried to discover a
deeper understanding of God's ways through constructing a logical
philosophical framework that drew together many different aspects of
Gods ways as revealed in the scriptures. Their efforts have provided
foundations for generations of Christians since their day, yet we also
have to acknowledge that their work is flawed and some of their
conclusions go beyond the scriptural revelation. Others, like Martin
Luther have been notable for their ready recognition of the limitations
of their powers to fathom the mysteries of God. "Thus far we are
permitted to go" he said, "and no further".

Yet this is not just an issue for great scholars; it is an issue for us
all. We all have a God-given drive to understand the world around us. We
have an inbuilt curiosity and conviction that there is some sort of
order in the chaos of life. In our age, everything from Darwin's
"survival of the fittest" to Richard Dawkins, "selfish gene" to Edward
Lorenz "Butterfly effect" has been put forward as the explanation for
the way things are. Reason is the arbiter of truth.

In the midst of this learning for understanding, Pauls says that "Jews
demand miraculous signs and Greeks look for wisdom, but we preach Christ
crucified: a stumbling-block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles."

It seems odd that Paul accuses the Jews of demanding signs, since that
is surely what Jesus provided. The testimony amongst the Jews was "No
one could perform such signs if God were not with him." The Pharisees
witnessed Jesus healing hundreds of people wherever He went and feeding
thousands from a few loaves, yet they still demanded of Him signs to
prove His claim to be the Messiah.

Paul himself goes on to say "My message and my preaching were not with
wise and persuasive words, but with a demonstration of the Spirit's
power, so that your faith might not rest on men's wisdom, but on God's
power." (1 Cor 2:4)

Paul's ministry was routinely accompanied with miracles and healings as
we read again and again in the Acts. There was no shortage of signs, and
yet still Paul accuses the Jews of demanding miraculous signs. The signs
were never enough.

Human understanding does not bring faith, and neither do signs. But why
does Paul focus on the cross rather than the resurrection or Pentecost?
For a long time, this puzzled me. It is in the resurrection that we see
the victory of Jesus over the powers of darkness and the sufficiency of
His sacrifice in dealing with our Sin. The Good News can hardly be
ascribed to the cross! If that had been the end there would be no good
news. The resurrection is the good news that validates all that went
before. But even the resurrection was not the climax of Jesus' mission.
The real fulfilment and ultimate meaning of His mission is found at
Pentecost -- the fulfilment of all those OT promises that a New Covenant
would be established in which God's Holy Spirit would be poured out upon
all God's people, bringing a heart of flesh instead of their hearts of
stone and writing His Law on their hearts instead of on tablets of
stone. It was the pouring out of the Spirit at Pentecost that brought
about transformation in people's lives and ultimately changed the world.
Without that all we would have is ancient documents providing the
biography of a radical Jewish prophet.

So why does Paul focus so strongly on the cross in his peaching. "I
resolved to know nothing while I was with you except Jesus Christ and
Him crucified." He had tried persuasive arguments on Mars Hill at
Athens, and he got no-where. That was a turning point in His approach to
the Gospel. Intellectual arguments and demonstrations of God's power can
only get you so far. The foolishness of the cross has to be faced and
either accepted or rejected.

The power and victory of God is demonstrated in the resurrection, but
the wisdom of God is demonstrated in the cross. Belief in a powerful God
is not so difficult -- but belief in a divine wisdom demonstrated
through a crucified and defeated saviour -- that is a stumbling block.
It is the stumbling block for Islam. They like the Mighty God of
Abraham, and admire Jesus as a prophet, but they are adamant that Jesus
was not crucified and no death was required for our forgiveness. Paul
was absolutely right: the cross is a stumbling block. All the other
religions of the world promise hope to those who try hard to live good
lives and none have a defeated saviour. The cross challenges us to
recognise that we are the cause of His death. Not just our sin, but our
unbelief. It was not sinful habits in the lives of the leaders that
caused them to seek Jesus' death, but stubborn unbelief that this Jesus,
who did not fit with their expectations, could possibly be the Messiah
despite all He did.

And this remains the prevailing issue with God-fearing Jews today, as
Neusner so powerfully illustrates.

So where does all this leave us. Can we sit comfortably pointing our
finger at others? Paul presents us here with a truth we need to reflect
on for our own lives. Neither signs nor understanding deliver us from
the basic problem of unbelief or distrust of God.

I can tell you from personal experience that neither understanding or
miraculous signs automatically produce faith in God. Certainly my
lifelong studying of the Bible has been an essential foundation to my
faith today, but it has not of itself produced faith. I have to make the
choice to believe. And I have to make that choice every day. I know what
I know, but walking with Jesus takes more than knowing. I have to say,
"I choose to believe that God is faithful as the scriptures claim. I
choose to believe that God loves me and hears my prayer as the Gospels
say."

Even miracles do not automatically produce faith. You can't get much
closer to a miracle than seeing them take place under your own hand. And
I have seen hundreds. But they do not solve the problem of unbelief.
Every time I pray for healing it is as if I am doing it for the first
time. I have to take risks and choose to believe. Every time I pray I
have to summon my faith that God hears me and answers my prayer because
He truly wants to.

Every setback or disappointment is a challenge to my confidence in God.
My life is a continuous discipline and fight of faith in which I
frequently fail. The cross shows me that God's wisdom is not my wisdom.
That victory follows defeat. That the wine comes from crushed grapes.

The crux of the matter for me, and I think for many of us, is how we
handle disappointment. If everything went along like clockwork, and
every prayer was immediately answered and good deeds were rewarded with
blessing and bad deeds with strife, then faith in God would be much more
straightforward. God could have designed the world like this, but in His
unfathomable wisdom he didn't.

So what do we do when things go wrong? When we have been hanging on in
prayer for some situation which ultimately ends in defeat? I have prayed
for two people who have been healed of cancer and two people who
subsequently died of their cancer. How do we respond to God in the face
of our failures? They hurt and confuse us. They undermine our
confidence. They deter us from going out on a limb again. They fill our
minds with questions we wish God would answer for us. They leave us
wounded. But then we must choose. Are we going to accept defeat, or get
up and re-engage with the battle of faith with renewed determination? We
can pick at a wound and keep it raw, or put balm on it and speed its
healing. We can wear our battle scars to induce sympathy, or with the
laughter of hind-sight. They can stop us from progressing further, or
remind us how far we have journeyed.

The easy way out is to avoid disappointment by having low expectations,
and I am afraid that that is the most common response. But that is not
worship. That is not honouring to God. God wants us to grow in our faith
and boldness before Him.

When the Canaanite woman wanted Jesus to deliver her demonised daughter
she was first put off by his disciples, and then by Jesus Himself, but
then, Matthew tells us "she came and worshiped Him, saying, \"Lord, help
me!\""

Although the incident looks like Jesus was reluctant to help her, we
actually realise that Jesus went there for that very purpose, and having
granted her request He immediately departed. The woman thought she was
having to try and persuade Jesus, but in fact, Jesus was persuading her
to be bold and courageous in her request.

That, my friends is worship. Boldness to ask God for help, no matter
what has gone wrong, no matter what disappointments we have already had.
God is not pleased when we shrink back in fear of more disappointment.
The Cross reminds us that the wisdom of God confounds the wisdom of men.
Press through and you will find God was all the time urging you on to
victory.
