---
title: 2016-10-09 Elisha heals Naaman
type: document
---
"Now Naaman was commander of the army of the king of Aram. He was a
great man in the sight of his master and highly regarded, because
through him the LORD had given victory to Aram. He was a valiant
soldier, but he had leprosy. Now bands from Aram had gone out and had
taken captive a young girl from Israel, and she served Naaman's wife.
She said to her mistress, \"If only my master would see the prophet who
is in Samaria! He would cure him of his leprosy.\" Naaman went to his
master and told him what the girl from Israel had said. \"By all means,
go,\" the king of Aram replied. \"I will send a letter to the king of
Israel.\" So Naaman left, taking with him ten talents of silver, six
thousand shekels of gold and ten sets of clothing. The letter that he
took to the king of Israel read: \"With this letter I am sending my
servant Naaman to you so that you may cure him of his leprosy.\" As soon
as the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his robes and said, \"Am
I God? Can I kill and bring back to life? Why does this fellow send
someone to me to be cured of his leprosy? See how he is trying to pick a
quarrel with me!\" When Elisha the man of God heard that the king of
Israel had torn his robes, he sent him this message: \"Why have you torn
your robes? Make the man come to me and he will know that there is a
prophet in Israel.\" So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and
stopped at the door of Elisha's house. Elisha sent a messenger to say to
him, \"Go, wash yourself seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will
be restored and you will be cleansed.\" But Naaman went away angry and
said, \"I thought that he would surely come out to me and stand and call
on the name of the LORD his God, wave his hand over the spot and cure me
of my leprosy. Are not Abana and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better
than any of the waters of Israel? Couldn't I wash in them and be
cleansed?\" So he turned and went off in a rage. Naaman's servants went
to him and said, \"My father, if the prophet had told you to do some
great thing, would you not have done it? How much more, then, when he
tells you, 'Wash and be cleansed'?\" So he went down and dipped himself
in the Jordan seven times, as the man of God had told him, and his flesh
was restored and became clean like that of a young boy. Then Naaman and
all his attendants went back to the man of God. He stood before him and
said, \"Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in
Israel. Please accept now a gift from your servant.\" The prophet
answered, \"As surely as the LORD lives, whom I serve, I will not accept
a thing.\" And even though Naaman urged him, he refused. \"If you will
not,\" said Naaman, \"please let me, your servant, be given as much
earth as a pair of mules can carry, for your servant will never again
make burnt offerings and sacrifices to any other god but the LORD. But
may the LORD forgive your servant for this one thing: When my master
enters the temple of Rimmon to bow down and he is leaning on my arm and
I bow there also---when I bow down in the temple of Rimmon, may the LORD
forgive your servant for this.\"" (2Ki 5:1-18 NIV)

"Now on his way to Jerusalem, Jesus travelled along the border between
Samaria and Galilee. As he was going into a village, ten men who had
leprosy met him. They stood at a distance and called out in a loud
voice, \"Jesus, Master, have pity on us!\" When he saw them, he said,
\"Go, show yourselves to the priests.\" And as they went, they were
cleansed. One of them, when he saw he was healed, came back, praising
God in a loud voice. He threw himself at Jesus' feet and thanked
him---and he was a Samaritan. Jesus asked, \"Were not all ten cleansed?
Where are the other nine? Was no-one found to return and give praise to
God except this foreigner?\" Then he said to him, \"Rise and go; your
faith has made you well.\"" (Lu 17:11-19 NIV)

## Preach

My friend Katy is a courageous Christian and her unbelieving boss has
some serious health issues. Katy often talks to her boss about God and
urges him to turn to God for healing. One weekend things got too much
for him and so he decided to bury his pride, leave aside his scepticism
about God and go to his local church to ask for healing.

The vicar was dismayed to hear of his health issues and was alarmed at
what this man was expecting of him. He felt inadequate and helpless. He
prayed a brief prayer of blessing and urged the man to seek help from
his doctor.

I wonder what would have happened if Katy's boss had come to our church
for healing? What do you and I say to people when we hear they are sick
or in great need. "Have you seen your GP?", "Have you tried Citizen's
Advice", "Do you know about this support group?" ...

\[ It is a wonderful thing that there are so many helps available to us
both from our welfare state and from the countless charities and
voluntary groups in the UK. This is a result of and an expression of our
Christian heritage and it has relieved the church of much of its burden
of care in our society. But it has also removed from the church much of
its need to dig deep in faith and find supernatural resources in God. It
has also removed much of the church's opportunity for demonstrating
God's power and love.

It was not too long ago when the church was the first place people
turned to in their need. Now it tends to be the last place and we are
out of practice when we are called upon to meet some great need. \]

Naaman turned in his desperate need to the people of God, from where, he
had been told, he could expect to find healing. And so Naaman called on
the king of Israel.

The king was supposed to be the representative of God's Kingdom on
earth, bringing God's rule and authority to God's people. But although
the king was holding the office, he had lost faith in the God in whose
name he ruled. Israel, who was supposed to be provoking the nations to
jealousy because of the mighty God they served, had lost its nerve, lost
its power, lost its distinctiveness. Of all the nations in the world,
there was only one that was in a covenant relationship with the God of
all the world. There was only one people who had great and wonderful
promises of healing and salvation. Naaman had tried everything else and
finally he turned to the one true place of real help. But tragically he
was met with the kind of unbelief that belonged to a Gentile rather than
the faith to be expected of God's man on earth.

Fortunately Elisha heard about Naaman's appeal and the king's dismay. He
boldly proclaimed his faith in God and pronounced healing for Naaman.

We love these ancient stories from the Old Testament and teach them to
the children in our Sunday schools. Perhaps we even say with a sigh,
"Ah! If only we had a prophet like Elisha to perform miracles..."

As far as the king was concerned, Naaman's appeal was an expression of
inappropriate expectations and an embarrassment, but to Elisha his
appeal was pleasing to God and an opportunity for the gospel.

The ten lepers cried out to Jesus to have mercy on them. Was this an
expression of inappropriate expectations and an embarrassment or
pleasing to God and an opportunity for the gospel?

\[ Blind Bartimaeus cried out to Jesus to have mercy on him. Was this an
expression of inappropriate expectations and an embarrassment or
pleasing to God and an opportunity for the gospel?

The man whose son had epilepsy cried out to the disciples to have mercy
on him. They had a go but failed to heal the child. Was this an
expression of inappropriate expectations and an embarrassment or was it
pleasing to God and an opportunity for the gospel?

The lame man called upon Peter and John who saw in this an opportunity
for the gospel as they demonstrated the power of God in healing.

Paul healed all the sick on Malta in demonstration that Jesus was truly
risen from the dead and powerfully active in the lives of men today. \]

What about us? We read and sing and proclaim that Jesus is risen from
the dead and is the same yesterday, today and forever - and silently
pray, "Please God, don't let me have to put these claims to the test."

It is clear that today in our culture the church is about the last place
that most people would think of turning for a miracle. They expect
clever people and technology to deliver all the miracles that they are
ever likely to see. But is it not also sadly the case that our little
village churches are one of the last places that anyone is likely to see
a miracle? Most are being kept going by tiny numbers of retired and
aging people. What kind of reception would Naaman find in these Houses
of God? Who will answer the cry of the ten lepers? Who will give Katy's
boss more than a kind word and a blessing?

How are we to get from shrinking back from such requests in fear and
inadequacy to standing up like Elisha and Jesus and the disciples and
proclaiming and demonstrating that Jesus truly is the same yesterday,
today and forever?

In thousands of churches across the world today people are rediscovering
that Jesus truly is the same yesterday, today and forever. Last week we
read that faith as small as a mustard seed is sufficient for any
miracle. Jesus said to the one leper who returned to praise God, "Your
faith has healed you." It was that mustard seed of faith that caused
those ten to set off on their way to the priest even whilst they were
still ravaged with leprosy. We might expect them to say, "When I am
healed I will go to the priest. What is the point of setting off when we
are still diseased?" But they set out in simple faith and trust, and
that is what each of us must do if we are to grow in our faith. We will
never progress from fearful passiveness towards bold and expectant
declarations of God's miracle working power if we wait until we see
something before we are prepared to act. Faith means taking God at His
word and acting as if we believed it even before we see the results.

But why bother? Why put ourselves out? Why risk our reputation and the
reputation of the church by actually trying to practice what we
proclaim? Isn't it safer to stick with what we know and can manage for
ourselves? Trying to involve God only complicates matters. Kings and
priests - those who are trying to organise things and arrange events and
keep things running smoothly -- they prefer the safety and security of
the familiar and controllable; involving children, animals or God is
asking for trouble!

It's all very well for the prophet Elisha. He is not a king or a priest.
He has no responsibilities to run things; he can come and go as he
pleases. He does not have to command armies and exercise diplomacy and
keep the finances above water. He doesn't have to answer to the church
wardens and the PCC and the Bishop. It's not Elisha that people will
complain to because the service was not to their liking, or if his bold
claims come to nothing, or worse still back-fire. "I'd like to see how
Elisha would cope with the pressures that I'm under..."

The bible teaches that the church of Christ is built upon the
foundations of apostles and prophets. We need leaders who can teach and
organise and gather. We need our "king", but we also need our prophets.
We need Elisha to challenge the comfort we have found in our
familiarity. We need Elisha to awaken again the passion for God's honour
and His fame. We need to give our ears and our hearts to his daring
faith in God's living and powerful presence. We need to let Elisha stir
the embers of our flickering faith into a flame of high expectation and
reclaim for Christ the reputation that He truly is the same yesterday,
today and forever.

Our world if full of people with both physical and spiritual needs that
only Christ can meet. As we prepare to appoint our new vicar, what kind
of a person do we need? Someone who will keep things running smoothly or
a prophet to provoke us and help us to reclaim the honour and fame of
the living resurrected Christ?
