---
title: 2016-06 Magazine - Righteousness by Faith
type: document
---
## Righteousness by Faith in Jesus

A plague afflicts the world that is far more deadly than AIDS or Malaria
or Yellow Fever -- it is Self-Righteousness. Self-righteousness stops
countless people coming to Jesus for forgiveness and salvation and leads
to eternal death.

In Luke 7:36-end we read of Jesus at Simon the Pharisee's house. Simon
is offended because Jesus accepts the devotion of a notorious sinner.
Simon knew his Psalms and perhaps was thinking of Ps 24 where David
writes:

> "Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? Who may stand in his holy
> place? The one who has clean hands and a pure heart"

How could Jesus let this sinner come to him? We could easily conclude
that Jesus enables sinners to come freely to God. But that is not quite
what Jesus says. Jesus' story is not just about sinners, but crucially
it is about *forgiven* sinners. It is forgiven sinners who can freely
approach God -- and forgiveness has to be received.

Simon was not wrong to think that only righteous people can approach
God; but he was wrong to think that his own righteousness was
sufficient.

Jesus told him a story about two debtors, one who owed a huge sum and
the other that owed just a little. However Jesus' point is not that we
can manage to repay a small debt, but that neither debtors could repay
and both needed to receive forgiveness. Jesus tells us that receiving
forgiveness from Him is the only basis for coming to God; it can never
be on the basis of our performance.

The point is not that we should grovel in the dirt bewailing our sins,
but that we should recognise very clearly that even our best efforts at
being godly are not the basis of our relationship with God. God's freely
given forgiveness is the sole basis of our relationship with Him.

In Galatians 2:15 Paul argues against self-righteousness, saying "a
person is not justified by observing the law, but by faith in Jesus
Christ." He is not saying that godliness doesn't matter, but he is most
definitely saying that our godliness does not count in terms of our
acceptance to God. Self-righteousness has no place in our relationship
with God.

Self-righteousness is not to do with whether we *consider* ourselves to
be righteous or not, but about the *basis* of our righteousness. A
self-righteous person looks to their own performance in making a
judgement about their righteousness. A non-self-righteous person looks
only to Christ in making a judgement about their righteousness.

Which of us has not thought "Because I have neglected to do X, Y or Z
God will probably not answer my prayer today"? How often do we pray,
read our bible or go to church out of a sense of duty to keep God on our
side? How often do we feel alienated from God for a period of "penance"
because we have been deliberately disobedient to God? If you do not
suffer from such temptations then praise God. May you never be afflicted
with this plague.

Whenever we think that God's attitude towards us is affected by our own
performance we are suffering from self-righteousness.

Paul shows us how to consider ourselves:

> I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ
> lives in me. The life I live in the body, I live by faith in the Son
> of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

As Christians we see ourselves as crucified with Christ and also raised
from the dead with Him. Having died, it is no longer I that live, but
Christ who lives in me -- and He is 100% righteous. God's attitude
towards me is always and only determined by the risen Christ who dwells
in me. God does not take into consideration my performance; He considers
only the performance of Jesus.

Will God hear and answer your prayer despite your bad attitudes and
selfish behaviour? If you live by faith in the Son of God instead of
faith in your performance then Yes! He will. He looks at Jesus'
performance, not yours.

Does God love you with a passion today, even though you have not given
much thought to Him for the last week? Yes! He does.

Many people think their relationship with God works like a car-park
ticket; it is valid for some period then it expires and needs renewing,
and if you forget to renew it you will face a penalty.

Some people think their ticket lasts a month and gets renewed by going
to church. As long as they get to church at least once a month they feel
safe with God, but beyond that they feel God might begin to get angry
with them and things might start going wrong.

Others think their ticket only lasts a week and is renewed by taking
communion or confessing their sins at church. If they miss a week they
start to feel insecure and that God might discipline them.

Others think their ticket only lasts a day. They need to read their
bible and pray every day to keep God's blessing on their life.

Many of us believe our ticket is renewed by confessing our sin. Whenever
we realise we have fallen short of God's standards we believe we need to
confess our sin in order to restore our relationship with God.

Some feel that they have so offended God by something they have done
that they simply can't come to God with a clear conscience any more.
They can never renew their ticket. Perhaps you fear God's displeasure
because you have divorced, or had an abortion, or stolen, or lied or
lusted after someone or something. You have committed some great sin or
a whole lot of so called small sins and you feel alienated from God. You
need some way of atoning for your sin, but nothing is sufficient or
effective.

This kind of thinking is so wrong. Righteousness does not come through
our actions, whether going to church, reading our bibles, praying or
confessing our sins. Righteousness is a free gift of God and it resides
in Jesus Christ who dwells within each of us who confess their need for
Him and put their trust in Him. Righteousness is ours by faith, not
works. If you have put your faith in Jesus as your saviour then your
righteousness is the righteousness of Jesus. You are forever righteous
before God and that is the end of it. Jesus' righteousness doesn't
expire and never needs renewing. It is a done deal in which we should
find rest for our souls.

The power of this truth is not to set us free to sin with impunity, but
to allow the love and goodness of God to draw us back whenever we go
astray. The devil wants us to believe that sin still has the power to
alienate us from God, but the truth is that the power of sin has been
broken by Jesus. Yes, sin is harmful and foolish, but it has no power to
separate me from God.

"There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ"

Stephen Dolley.
