---
title: 2016-04-10 Jesus reveals Himself
type: document
---
Acts 9:1-6 Meanwhile, Saul was still breathing out murderous threats
against the Lord's disciples. He went to the high priest and asked him
for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any there
who belonged to the Way, whether men or women, he might take them as
prisoners to Jerusalem. As he neared Damascus on his journey, suddenly a
light from heaven flashed around him. He fell to the ground and heard a
voice say to him, \"Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?\" \"Who are
you, Lord?\" Saul asked. \"I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,\" he
replied. \"Now get up and go into the city, and you will be told what
you must do.\"

John 21:1-19 Afterwards Jesus appeared again to his disciples, by the
Sea of Tiberias. It happened this way: Simon Peter, Thomas (called
Didymus), Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two
other disciples were together. \"I'm going out to fish,\" Simon Peter
told them, and they said, \"We'll go with you.\" So they went out and
got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing. Early in the
morning, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not realise
that it was Jesus. He called out to them, \"Friends, haven't you any
fish?\" \"No,\" they answered. He said, \"Throw your net on the right
side of the boat and you will find some.\" When they did, they were
unable to haul the net in because of the large number of fish. Then the
disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, \"It is the Lord!\" As soon as
Simon Peter heard him say, \"It is the Lord,\" he wrapped his outer
garment around him (for he had taken it off) and jumped into the water.
The other disciples followed in the boat, towing the net full of fish,
for they were not far from shore, about a hundred yards. When they
landed, they saw a fire of burning coals there with fish on it, and some
bread. Jesus said to them, \"Bring some of the fish you have just
caught.\" Simon Peter climbed aboard and dragged the net ashore. It was
full of large fish, 153, but even with so many the net was not torn.
Jesus said to them, \"Come and have breakfast.\" None of the disciples
dared ask him, \"Who are you?\" They knew it was the Lord. Jesus came,
took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish. This
was now the third time Jesus appeared to his disciples after he was
raised from the dead. When they had finished eating, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, \"Simon son of John, do you truly love me more than these?\"
\"Yes, Lord,\" he said, \"you know that I love you.\" Jesus said, \"Feed
my lambs.\" Again Jesus said, \"Simon son of John, do you truly love
me?\" He answered, \"Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.\" Jesus said,
\"Take care of my sheep.\" The third time he said to him, \"Simon son of
John, do you love me?\" Peter was hurt because Jesus asked him the third
time, \"Do you love me?\" He said, \"Lord, you know all things; you know
that I love you.\" Jesus said, \"Feed my sheep. I tell you the truth,
when you were younger you dressed yourself and went where you wanted;
but when you are old you will stretch out your hands, and someone else
will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.\" Jesus said
this to indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God.
Then he said to him, \"Follow me!\""

## Preach

Both of our readings are about post-resurrection appearances of Jesus.

> After his suffering, he showed himself to these men and gave many
> convincing proofs that he was alive. He appeared to them over a period
> of forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God. (Acts 1:3)

The resurrection of Jesus defies adequate description. It was completely
different to Lazarus' resurrection from the dead. Lazarus did not need
to offer "convincing proofs" of his resurrection. It was accepted as a
simple, though remarkable, truth and resulted in crowds following Jesus.
But the resurrected Jesus was clearly something completely new and
outside any category that could be offered. Jesus had to persuade even
His closest disciples that He was really physically alive and not an
apparition like a ghost. Even so, Matthew tells us, some doubted:

> "When they saw him, they worshipped him; but some doubted." Matt 28:17

There seem to have been two principle problems: firstly that He was no
longer immediately recognisable. Even those closest to Him were unable
to recognise Him immediately. Mary thought He was a gardener and in our
Gospel reading, Peter failed at to recognise Him. Likewise the disciples
on the road to Emmaus spent all day with Jesus teaching them and yet
failed to realise it was Jesus. We are not told why He was not
immediately recognisable; it is simply presented as a fact.

The second obvious problem understanding the nature of Jesus'
resurrection was that He no longer had an address. Previously, anyone
who wanted to could go and find Jesus. He didn't just appear and
disappear, and He didn't walk through locked doors.

But the resurrection Jesus appeared and disappeared just like a ghost.
But He clearly wasn't a ghost, and took pains to make sure His disciples
knew He wasn't a ghost. When He was visibly with them he was entirely
physical and ate meals with them, as the accounts are at pains to point
out.

Jesus appeared many times over a period of 40 days, but then He didn't
just stop appearing, He visibly rose into heaven as a physical person.
The meaning is clear, and forms part of the essential Christian faith.
Through the incarnation, death and resurrection of Jesus, the Trinity
now includes a man, the Man Jesus. This too is a mystery we cannot
adequately describe or comprehend, but it is the foundation of our hope
and confidence in God's grace to understand us in our weak humanity.

It is astonishing and sobering and perhaps comforting to know that
amongst the disciples who walked with Jesus before His death and who met
Him after His resurrection, there were some who doubted.

Doubt is not a virtue, not something we should sit comfortably with, but
it is part of our humanity. It is natural and understandable. But
perhaps those two qualities are the problem! - Being natural and
understandable. Jesus is neither natural nor understandable. Faith takes
us beyond the natural and the understandable.

Our readings show us sincere and deeply religious people acting in
natural and understandable ways. Paul was sincerely convinced that Jesus
and the new movement of His disciples were an evil deception that, as a
God fearing man, he had a duty to supress.

The disciples were confused and leaderless after the crucifixion and
needed time to think. When we find ourselves in difficult and confusing
situations, we often take comfort in doing something we feel at home in.
For the Galilean disciples, that meant fishing; the way of life they had
known since childhood.

Jesus had risen from the tomb and appeared to them. He had talked again
about the Kingdom, but then disappeared again. He seemed to be leaving
it all up to them, which was quite ridiculous. How could they be
expected to do what Jesus Himself had failed to do? God was asking and
expecting far too much of them. The disciples were looking to Peter to
lead them, but Peter was consumed with self-condemnation over his denial
and abandonment of Jesus at His trial. It was a hopeless mess.

Jesus met the disciples on the beach and recommissioned them. There are
echoes of the feeding of the thousands here. Jesus telling his disciples
to feed the people and providing for them bread and fish. But this time
the disciples caught the fish themselves, yet Jesus was still involved
in the miracle. Jesus was saying, "I've shown you how to do it, now it's
your turn. I will help you, but you must do it."

Living as disciples takes us beyond the natural and beyond our
understanding and this can only happen through Jesus revealing Himself
to us.

Jesus revealed Himself to Paul in a blinding light and thunderous voice
- not a particularly common experience. He revealed Himself to the
Apostles in our gospel reading through a miracle followed by a meal.
There are a wide range of ways in which Jesus reveals Himself to us from
the blindingly clear to the gradual awareness of His presence. Jesus
still reveals Himself to people in a wide range of ways.

A missionary friend was telling us how they went into a remote village
in Ecuador and showed them a film about Jesus. To their astonishment
they found that the villagers immediately recognised Jesus in the film
and were eager to lean all about Him. They told our friend that the man
they had seen in the film had visited the village recently, told them
his name was Jesus, shared the good news of the kingdom and told them
that some white people would come and tell them more about Him.

A friend was talking to someone in a supermarket about Jesus recently
and then joined the checkout queue. The person behind her said, "Excuse
me, I heard you talking about Jesus. Can you tell me about him? I'm a
Muslim and Jesus has been coming to me in my dreams recently and I want
to get to know him."

Mirrlees' cousin Nicolas was until a few years ago an atheist GP. The
Holy Spirit began to trouble him and challenge his atheist faith. We
started having long conversations as he explored the Christian faith,
but he could never come to the point of believing and trusting Jesus.
Then one day he was sitting in someone's garden when suddenly there was
a great gust of wind. In a moment he was filled with faith and I later
had the privilege of baptising him during a mission trip to South
Africa. Since that day he has been a transformed man zealous for God's
kingdom.

Everyone's story of how Jesus revealed Himself to them is different and
personal, yet one factor is common to all who know Jesus. It is He who
makes Himself known to us; we cannot find Him on our own. Jesus said,

> \"No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them." (Jn
> 6:44)

But there is a common factor in many of Jesus' appearances after the
resurrection, and that is sharing in a meal. Again and again in the
resurrection appearances we are told of Jesus eating with His disciples.
Sharing meals was an important aspect of His self-revelation which is
continued in the celebration of Holy Communion but also in Christian
hospitality which is an important aspect of discipleship.

Eating together is a vital aspect of fellowship, discipling and
evangelism. Much of Jesus' ministry took place over meals and Jesus and
the apostles taught explicitly about hospitality:

> "...For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave
> me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me..." (Matt 25:35)
>
> "...when you give a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame,
> the blind, and you will be blessed, because they cannot repay you."
> (Lk 14:14)
>
> "Therefore an overseer must be above reproach, the husband of one
> wife, sober-minded, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to
> teach..." (1Tim 3:2)
>
> "Show hospitality to one another" (1Pet 4:9)
>
> "Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers..." (Heb 13:2)

The most basic application of hospitality is simply families eating
their regular meals together. With the advent of television and computer
games and long working hours or shift work, fewer and fewer families
share regular meals together. Whatever the reason for families not
eating together, there are countless studies that you can easily find on
the internet that demonstrate that families that eat together are
happier and have fewer problems than those who don't.

Although there is little explicit teaching in the bible about families
eating together, it was the norm in Jewish families and in the church.
Families eating their daily meals together is a vital aspect of sharing
the faith from one generation to the next, and indeed a child's simple
faith and natural curiosity can encourage and provoke the faith of their
parents.

When Jesus shared the last supper with His disciples He added a new
dimension to the family meal; a dimension that was highly valued in the
early church, but has I fear been largely lost in the institutionalising
of this meal in the Eucharist. Jesus said to remember Him whenever we
eat together, a command we see being immediately acted out in Acts 2:

> "Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They
> broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere
> hearts" (Acts 2:46)

Jesus never intended that the Last Supper should only be celebrated by a
priest in a church worship service. It was meant to be, and initially
was, a regular family celebration over the family meal. Friends and
neighbours and visitors would naturally be present and as well as
enjoying the joyful company over a good meal they would hear about
Jesus' death and resurrection and the anticipation of His coming again
in Glory. What a wonderful and natural witness to a family's faith. It
is not surprising that the church grew so rapidly.

Even if we do not celebrate the Last Supper over our regular meals, they
are times of natural fellowship where our values and faith are made
evident in the course of our interactions and conversation. The risen
Jesus revealed Himself time and again through sharing meals and He
continues to do so today.

So firstly I want to encourage you to make a priority of sharing meals
together in your home without the distractions of TV or radio.

And secondly I want to encourage you to be hospitable in whatever ways
you are able, both to those within the church family but especially
towards newcomers and unbelievers. You may not feel able to share your
faith using words but perhaps you can let Jesus reveal Himself in the
context of a shared meal -- whether that be a coffee and cake at Tea on
the Green or lunch or tea or a dinner party at home.

Perhaps you might dare to say a simple grace, or even offer to say a
simple prayer for your friend. To do so communicates a great deal about
your faith without you having to event talk to your friend directly
about your faith. When you pray you are demonstrating to your friend
that you have a real personal relationship with Jesus; that you believe
Jesus is alive and real and present with you. It demonstrates you expect
Jesus to hear you and answer you. It shows that you can address God
without fear and without complicated rituals. It demonstrates that you
are at peace with God and know that He loves and forgives you.

A shared meal and a simple prayer -- these are hardly scary. They might
not lead to anything else, but you never know! Jesus has a habit of
revealing Himself through shared meals.
