---
title: 2016-01-03 Joh 1_10-18
type: document
---
**Joh 1:10-18** "10 He was in the world, and though the world was made
through him, the world did not recognise him. 11 He came to that which
was his own, but his own did not receive him. 12 Yet to all who received
him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become
children of God--- 13 children born not of natural descent, nor of human
decision or a husband's will, but born of God. 14 The Word became flesh
and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the
One and Only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth. 15 ¶
John testifies concerning him. He cries out, saying, \"This was he of
whom I said, 'He who comes after me has surpassed me because he was
before me.'\" 16 From the fulness of his grace we have all received one
blessing after another. 17 For the law was given through Moses; grace
and truth came through Jesus Christ. 18 No-one has ever seen God, but
God the One and Only, who is at the Father's side, has made him known."

**Eph 1:3-14** "3 ¶ Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual
blessing in Christ. 4 For he chose us in him before the creation of the
world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love 5 he predestined us
to be adopted as his sons through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his
pleasure and will--- 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has
freely given us in the One he loves. 7 In him we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of
God's grace 8 that he lavished on us with all wisdom and understanding.
9 And he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good
pleasure, which he purposed in Christ, 10 to be put into effect when the
times will have reached their fulfilment---to bring all things in heaven
and on earth together under one head, even Christ. 11 In him we were
also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who
works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will, 12 in
order that we, who were the first to hope in Christ, might be for the
praise of his glory. 13 And you also were included in Christ when you
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. Having believed,
you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is
a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who
are God's possession---to the praise of his glory."

**1Jo 3:1** "How great is the love the Father has lavished on us, that
we should be called children of God! And that is what we are! The reason
the world does not know us is that it did not know him."

Through this Christmas season we have journeyed through the early
chapters of the Gospels from the prophetic expectations of Zacharias and
Mary and Simeon through to the birth of the long-awaited King who would
usher in the new Kingdom of God. Last week we read of the wise men from
the east who came to worship Jesus whilst the Jewish king Herod tried to
kill Him. This was itself a prophetic enactment of the sad reality that
John proclaims at the start of our Gospel reading:

> "He came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him."

Herod had been trying to present himself as the King and Saviour of
Israel and killed anyone who presented the slightest challenge. Those
who eventually called for Jesus' death felt threatened by this miracle
worker from Galilee. But many sincere and serious-minded people both
then and since have rejected Jesus because He did not meet their
expectations of a Messiah.

The prophets spoke of a restored nation of Israel having thrown off the
shackles of servitude to occupying forces and being justly ruled by God
through the messiah-king in the line of David. The Jews of Jesus' day
were expecting national deliverance leading to freedom from the
oppression of unjust rulers. They expected national prosperity and
greatness.

Although Jesus claimed to be God's anointed ruler in His new kingdom He
was a puzzle. He both spoke and acted with unprecedented authority,
especially through the healings, but He made no headway towards
transforming Israel into a great nation or bringing world peace and
justice.

Because the kingdom that Jesus brought was quite different from their
expectations most of the religious leaders rejected Jesus as a fake.
This has been a stumbling block for the majority of God-fearing Jews
down through the centuries.

However, having spent three years living with Jesus, His disciples were
in no doubt of His being sent by God with His authority. In time they
came to realise that the whole nation of Israel and its long and
colourful history was not leading to a socio-political climax, but
rather that the whole was symbolic of a larger reality. God's project
was not Israel, but all the peoples of the world. The Kingdom was not
merely about the pecking-order of one nation amongst many, but about
victory over the devil and deliverance from his power for every
individual who becomes a child of God.

And so John tells us that being a member of God's family was no longer
to be a national thing but rather an individual thing available to all
the peoples of the nations:

> "to all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave
> the right to become children of God"

Again and again Jesus made outlandish statements and claims redefining
what the Kingdom is, what the Law was, who the people of God are, who
would inherit the kingdom and so on.

One of the things that caused most upset amongst the Jews was Jesus'
redefinition of membership of God's chosen people, His family:

> "born not of natural descent, nor of human decision or a husband's
> will, but born of God."

Each person needs to be "born of God". Being a child of God, one of the
chosen people, was no longer a national privilege belonging to Israel
alone, but was on the basis of belief in Jesus as the King of God's
promised Kingdom on earth. Descent from Abraham counted for nothing.

Anyone who accepted Jesus' claim to kingship could become a child of
God. But even then it required God's sovereign action; to give us
new-birth through the work of the Holy Spirit.

The fact that Jesus describes this as being *born* indicates that it is
a transformative experience; dying to our old nature and being
born-again with a new one. Something of great significance changes in us
when we become a child of God. The prophets described it variously as

-   being given a heart of flesh in place of our hearts of stone;

-   having God's law written on our hearts;

-   knowing God for ourselves

-   valuing fellowship with God above all else

Not only are we changed through being born-again, but Jesus has
transformed the very nature of our knowledge of God. Under the Old
Covenant the best that most people could hope for was to know *about*
God, to know what the Law said and to try and keep it. But through Jesus
and His gift of the Holy Spirit our relationship with God has been
transformed. We can know him personally in a child/father relationship
with Jesus as our Brother.

> "The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen
> his glory, the glory of the One and Only, who came from the Father,
> full of grace and truth."

John wrote these words in the literal sense; he saw the glory of Jesus
with his eyes as Jesus dwelt in the flesh with him. But Jesus rose from
the dead and is alive and continues to dwell with us full of grace and
truth. We cannot see Him with our eyes, but the Holy Spirit has been
given to us so that we can see Jesus. We see Him in one another, in the
reading of God's word and in numerous other ways. And He speaks to us in
myriad ways.

What a contrast this is with the Old Covenant! No longer is communion
with God a special privilege of the priesthood or the especially devout.
The Old Covenant religion celebrated the Law of Moses, but the New
Covenant celebrates grace:

> "From the fullness of his grace we have all received one blessing
> after another. For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth
> came through Jesus Christ."

Our epistle reading explores the consequences of that grace, making it
clear that God loves us because of His love and not because of our
performance. This new foundation of grace allows believers to be totally
secure in his love. We have received from Him grace upon grace.

But it is not just grace that Jesus brings us; He also brings truth.
Grace is relatively easy to receive but truth is often difficult. Here
are some "grace" scriptures:

> "God demonstrates his love for us in this: While we were still
> sinners, Christ died for us. Since we have now been justified by his
> blood, how much more shall we be saved from God's wrath through him!"
> (Rom 5:8-9)

From our reading in Ephesians:

> "In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
> in accordance with the riches of God's grace." (Eph 1:7)

The truth Jesus brings is not so easy to receive. Consider for instance
this truth from John 3:18

> "Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not
> believe stands condemned already because he has not believed in the
> name of God's one and only Son."
>
> "Enter through the narrow gate; for the gate is wide and the way is
> broad that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter through
> it. But the gate is small and the way is narrow that leads to life,
> and there are few who find it." (Matt 7:13-14)

Grace upon grace does not come to everyone, but only to the children of
God; those who believe and receive Jesus. If we want to receive grace,
we must believe His truth. We cannot receive "Jesus" but reject the
truth He taught. Grace and truth come together as a package. We must
accept Jesus as He is without requiring Him to fit in with our ideas.

Jesus never shrunk back from proclaiming the truth. Many times we read
of people who were attracted to Him because of His grace, but then went
away because the truth was too challenging for them.

We do no-one any favours by presenting gospel grace without gospel
truth. It only leads to confusion and disappointment. Telling someone
that God loves them no matter what they do and that Jesus died to save
them is the grace-part of the Gospel. It needs to be accompanied with
the truth -- that repentance, being born-again and obedience to Jesus is
how we receive that grace -- without which we are condemned to God's
endless wrath.

Let us pray as we enter this new year, that we might live as authentic
children of God, secure in His grace, believing His truth and obedient
to the Holy Spirit. But let us pray also that we might have the courage
to share the authentic Gospel -- Jesus the King, who brings to us both
grace and truth.
