---
title: 2016-08-28 Living before God
type: document
---
Luke 14:1-14 One Sabbath, when Jesus went to eat in the house of a
prominent Pharisee, he was being carefully watched.

There in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy. Jesus asked the
Pharisees and experts in the law, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath
or not?" But they remained silent. So taking hold of the man, he healed
him and sent him away. Then he asked them, "If one of you has a son or
an ox that falls into a well on the Sabbath day, will you not
immediately pull him out?" And they had nothing to say.

When he noticed how the guests picked the places of honour at the table,
he told them this parable: "When someone invites you to a wedding feast,
do not take the place of honour, for a person more distinguished than
you may have been invited. If so, the host who invited both of you will
come and say to you, 'Give this person your seat.' Then, humiliated, you
will have to take the least important place. But when you are invited,
take the lowest place, so that when your host comes, he will say to you,
'Friend, move up to a better place.' Then you will be honoured in the
presence of all the other guests. For all those who exalt themselves
will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted." Then
Jesus said to his host, "When you give a luncheon or dinner, do not
invite your friends, your brothers or sisters, your relatives, or your
rich neighbours; if you do, they may invite you back and so you will be
repaid. But when you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the
lame, the blind, and you will be blessed. Although they cannot repay
you, you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous."

Proverbs 25:6-7 Do not exalt yourself in the king's presence, and do not
claim a place among his great men; it is better for him to say to you,
"Come up here," than for him to humiliate you before his nobles.

## Sermon

Jesus was having lunch with a bunch of Pharisees, but He was having
trouble getting them to engage in conversation with Him. He was really
trying to get the Pharisees to think beyond the familiar routines of
their religious practices. He wanted them to think about their
relationship with God.

He started by trying to engage them on their favourite topic -- the Law,
"Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?" - but they wouldn't
answer.

How would you answer? No doubt you would say, "Of course!" because you
know that Jesus did so frequently. But what if we asked, "Is it lawful
to play cards on a Sunday"? It is not so long ago that many Christians
would have said, "No!" and no doubt there are some who would still say
"No!" What about Sunday trading? Why should something be permissible on
one day of the week and not on another? This series of parables provoke
us to think twice before we answer. Why are most present-day Christians
far more relaxed about these issues than Christians were a century ago?
Have we simply become permissive and lost our respect for holy living?
In the end it all boils down to "What is the purpose of the Law? What
has it to do with our relationship with God?"

"Is it lawful\..." is a searching question, the answer to which goes to
the very heart of the Christian faith. The New Testament answers this
question in an astonishing way. The Holy Spirit tells us through the
scriptures that the Law was never meant to make us holy. Its purpose was
to show us our need for salvation. We have died to the Law in Christ's
crucifixion and now live new lives in the resurrection power and
righteousness of Jesus.

Jesus healed the man with dropsy and then tried to engage them with
another question - "If one of you has a son or an ox that falls into a
well on the Sabbath day, will you not immediately pull him out?" But
still they would not answer.

How would you answer? No doubt you would say, "Of course!" But Jesus'
question probes deeper. Not just, "What does the law say?" but "how do
you apply the Law to your own circumstances?" It is very easy to point
the finger at others and avoid examining our own hearts. It is also very
easy to set the standard for others to our own level of obedience. For
instance, what you think people should do about observing speed limits
will very likely be determined by your own behaviour. Jesus wants to
provoke a discussion here. What do you do about this law? Why do you do
that? What does God think about it? Do you have different standards for
yourself than you hold others to? Who should be setting the standards?
You or God? How does God view infringements of the law?

This question, "How do you apply the law" is another searching question
which goes to the heart of the Christian faith. It takes us to our
relationship with God. How do you live out your faith? It moves us away
from rules and rituals into everyday life. What does it mean for you to
be a Christian? Is it a matter of trying to keep the rules, or are you
living in relationship with God? How do you live your faith so that you
are a witness to the grace and love of Christ?

When Jesus saw that the Pharisees wouldn't engage with Him over the Law,
He tried a softer approach through the Wisdom scriptures. He took the
proverb from our first reading and wove it into a story applying it to
the very situation they were in. On the face of it, it doesn't appear to
have anything to do with God; it is simply a piece of wisdom about
social behaviour in a shame-based culture. It seems very innocuous and
indeed rather surprising from Jesus' lips. The conclusion, "Then you
will be honoured in the presence of all the other guests" is the kind of
thing we would expect Jesus to condemn; seeking the honour of men
instead of God. For example, Jesus said, "How can you believe since you
accept glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from
the only God?"

So why does Jesus give them this piece of home-spun advice for
increasing their honour before one another? Well, He adds an intriguing
concluding principal not found in the proverb: "For all those who exalt
themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be
exalted." These words would immediately turn the thoughts of the hearers
to God, for it was a favourite theme of the Jews that God would exalt
the downtrodden people of Israel over the arrogant and wicked Gentiles.
Mary's song was typical "He has put down the mighty from their seat and
has exalted the humble and meek."

Jesus masterfully takes this ordinary everyday situation of a community
meal and turns it into an object lesson in living out our faith before
God. All of life is played out before God and every act, however simple,
has within it the opportunity to invest in eternity. When we seek only
the honour of men we miss out on that opportunity, for as Jesus said in
the Sermon on the Mount, "When you give to the needy \... to be honoured
by others, I tell you, you have received your reward in full."

In this story, Jesus takes us beyond rules and religious observance to
living out our daily lives in relationship with God. Whereas we are
naturally materially and socially conscious, Jesus urges us to nurture
eternal consciousness. When you know that you are deeply loved by God
and will be glorified with Jesus when we die, it frees us from the need
to seek honour from men. So many people are slaves to a deep and unmet
longing for the approval of others. It drives children to obsessive
school work, teenagers to smoking, sex and drugs. It drives adults to
workaholism and other destructive and addictive behaviour. Living for
the honour of men instead of the honour of God enslaves us. Living in
the knowledge of God's grace and love frees us to be who we are and
discover who God has made us to be.

The effect of this security in God is demonstrated by Jesus in this
incident. We probably do not flinch at Jesus' first two questions, "What
does the Law say" and "How do you apply the Law", but this story about
seeking the best place is very pointed; "When he noticed how the guests
picked the places of honour at the table, he told them this parable\..."

Jesus is not the least embarrassed to tell this story that will
discomfort the guests. For Jesus, there is something far more important
than the guest's comfort at stake here. How often do we shrink back from
speaking God's word in a situation because we don't want to feel awkward
or make others feel awkward? Perhaps someone starts to gossip to us, but
rather than say "Let's talk about this person's good qualities rather
than their bad" we just let it go on. Or someone shares a problem with
us, and instead of offering to pray with them we say "Oh, I'm sure it
will all work out\..." We are surrounded by people with desperate
spiritual needs that we could help with, but for the fear of
embarrassment we keep quiet. Jesus was so secure in His Father's love
and approval that He was free to bring the Word of Life into whatever
situation He found Himself in.

Jesus' first story about the wedding guests was not directed at any one
in particular; each person could apply it to themselves. But the next
story Jesus tells is far more pointed. Perhaps the host had been amused
at the squirming of his guests during the first story and so Jesus now
gives the host an opportunity to squirm!

> "When you give a luncheon or dinner, do not invite your friends, your
> brothers or sisters, your relatives, or your rich neighbours; if you
> do, they may invite you back and so you will be repaid. But when you
> give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
> and you will be blessed. Although they cannot repay you, you will be
> repaid at the resurrection of the righteous."

Did you notice that the man with dropsy that Jesus healed was not a
dinner guest? He was just a plant to see what Jesus would do. After he
was healed, we are told, he left. So Jesus turns to His host and says,
"When you give a luncheon or dinner\... invite the poor, the crippled,
the lame, the blind, and you will be blessed." Jesus directs this story
directly at the host and it is a story about what the host has just
done, inviting his well-to-do friends to a dinner party. Jesus so wants
His host to lift his eyes to a bigger picture of God's purpose for his
life that He is prepared to offend him.

Jesus urges us to live out our everyday lives before God, looking to His
reward and approval rather than to men. This story also has strong
echoes in the Jewish scriptures; the next line from Mary's song is
typical, "He has filled the hungry with good things and the rich he has
sent empty away." Inviting the poor is not just inviting God's approval;
it is imitating God's nature.

**Conclusion**

So we see in this little sequence at a lunch party Jesus wanting to move
his Pharisee friends from their rather small minded religious observance
towards a living relationship with God, where their actions are
motivated not simply by religious expectations but by the loving
presence of God. Religion offers rules to obey but Jesus offers us a
relationship with God. Religion brings judgement and condemnation for
our failures but Jesus offers us the prospect of being so transformed by
His Spirit that we become more like God Himself.

Religion offers us a way of judging ourselves to be better than others.
Jesus offers us adoption as God's beloved children.

Religion makes us slaves of men's approval; Jesus sets us free to bring
God's life-giving presence wherever we go. Jesus can sometimes be an
uncomfortable companion, but the more we look to God, the more we are
transformed into His likeness.

**What is lawful on the Sabbath**? Why? (Cards, Sunday trading)

Have we lost our respect for holiness? -- What is the Law for?

**How do you apply the Law to your own circumstances**?

All too easy to judge others by standards we don't keep.

What about speed limits?

Who should be setting the standards? You or God?

How does God view infringements of the law?

Is it a matter of trying to keep the rules, or are you living in
relationship with God? - as a witness to the grace and love of Christ?

**Wisdom-story**

"How can you believe since you accept glory from one another but do not
seek the glory that comes from the only God?"

"For all those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who
humble themselves will be exalted."

"He has put down the mighty from their seat and has exalted the humble
and meek."

Jesus urges us to nurture eternal consciousness.

"When you give to the needy \... to be honoured by others, I tell you,
you have received your reward in full."

Living in the knowledge of God's grace and love frees us to be who we
are and discover who God has made us to be.

"When he noticed how the guests picked the places of honour at the
table, he told them this parable\..."

How often do we shrink back from speaking God's word?

**Lunch Party**

"He has filled the hungry with good things and the rich he has sent
empty away."

**Conclusion**
