---
title: 2017-01-08 The glory of the Lord has risen upon you
type: document
---
**Isaiah 60:1-6**

"Arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the LORD rises
upon you. See, darkness covers the earth and thick darkness is over the
peoples, but the LORD rises upon you and his glory appears over you.
Nations will come to your light, and kings to the brightness of your
dawn. \"Lift up your eyes and look about you: All assemble and come to
you; your sons come from afar, and your daughters are carried on the
arm. Then you will look and be radiant, your heart will throb and swell
with joy; the wealth on the seas will be brought to you, to you the
riches of the nations will come. Herds of camels will cover your land,
young camels of Midian and Ephah. And all from Sheba will come, bearing
gold and incense and proclaiming the praise of the LORD."

**Matthew 2:1-3,11,13**

After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, during the time of King
Herod, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, \"Where is the
one who has been born king of the Jews? We saw his star in the east and
have come to worship him.\" When King Herod heard this he was disturbed,
and all Jerusalem with him \... On coming to the house, they saw the
child with his mother Mary, and they bowed down and worshipped him. Then
they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold and of
incense and of myrrh \... When they had gone, an angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream. \"Get up,\" he said, \"take the child and
his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod
is going to search for the child to kill him.\"

## Preach: {#preach .H2-Numbered}

Today we celebrate the Epiphany; the manifestation of Christ to the
Gentiles. At the birth of Jesus the Christ was announced to Israel by
the Angels and through the prophecies of Simeon and Anna in the temple.
Then around two years later God revealed Christ to the Gentiles, in the
persons of the Magi. They began the ongoing fulfilment of the ancient
prophecies of Isaiah concerning the Gentiles coming to Christ.

> In **Isaiah 49:6** we read \"It is too small a thing for you to be my
> servant to restore the tribes of Jacob and bring back those of Israel
> I have kept. I will also make you a light for the Gentiles, that my
> salvation may reach to the ends of the earth.\"

We are of course the beneficiaries of that promise and it is a major
theme of Isaiah which he repeats many times, including in our reading
today. It was written to the Jews for them to anticipate the revelation
of Christ to the world, but it is equally applicable to all Christians
today; for us to remember and reaffirm that the inheritance that the
Father has promised to give to Jesus as His reward is not a small
remnant but a mighty harvest from all the nations.

Isaiah says that darkness covers the earth and thick darkness covers the
peoples. As we look at the trouble spots around the world, the uncertain
political times ahead, the staggering numbers of relationship break-ups,
the hopelessness in so many people's lives and the opposition to faith
in Jesus it is not difficult to see the darkness.

Global persecution of Christians is at an all-time high with around
160,000 Christians a year being killed because of their faith. Countless
more are imprisoned or seriously discriminated against.

But Isaiah's exhortation is for us to lift up our eyes and see the light
that has risen upon us. As Christians we are called to celebrate the
light! Isaiah calls us to "Lift up your eyes and look about you".

We have much to celebrate in Christ. His light has risen upon us and His
glory appears over us. Across the world God's people are rising to the
challenge of taking Jesus out of the church and into their communities.

There is a greater world-wide focus on mission today than there has ever
been before. The most difficult to reach peoples are being reached in
ways and with an effectiveness never before seen. For instance hundreds
of thousands of Muslims in the most closed and oppressive counties are
turning to Jesus and Islamic extremists are becoming evangelists for
Jesus. The media is not reporting this, but it is well documented and is
happening right across the world.

Of the 7 million Jews living in the USA, 1/4 are Christian. There could
well be more Jewish Christians in the world than practicing English
Christians!

Nepal, where there is ferocious persecution of Christians, has the
fastest growing Christian church in the world. The church there looks
just like the New Testament church full of excitement and signs and
wonders and healings along with mass imprisonment and poverty.

India is also a very hostile environment for Christians, yet right
across rural India churches are being planted at an unprecedented rate
by Indian evangelists.

All across the world the Kingdom of God is growing stronger. The
previously suppressed churches in Eastern Europe and China are growing
very strongly and the churches in South America have been experiencing
rapid growth for decades now. The Christian faith is a dominant force in
North American life.

In Africa many wonderful things are happening. As a result of the
witness of just one couple in Mozambique, 10,000 new churches have been
planted in that country with 1 million people coming to Christ.

The most extraordinary growth is happening overseas, but even here in
the UK God is doing a new thing. In the past public evangelism has
mostly been left to "gifted evangelists", but in recent years God has
been raising up thousands of ordinary believers who are taking the
gospel into the streets with healings and miracles. Jesus is healing the
sick and performing many other miracles on a daily basis throughout this
land -- even in Anglican churches!

There are many churches throughout the UK that are having a significant
impact on local crime rates and NHS spending and every year 10's
thousands of Christian youth attend worship and teaching conferences
inspiring them in their faith.

The people who believe that God is dead and faith in Christ is
foolishness have no idea what is coming. They are looking at darkness
and not surprisingly can see nothing. But we can lift our eyes and see.
We know that the risen Christ is coming again in Glory and that in the
meantime His kingdom will go on growing and darkness will forever be
defeated by the light of the Gospel.

It's nice to know we are on the winning side, but of course that is not
quite the point! Christ is the hope that those living in darkness need
and we are ambassadors of that hope.

So what are we ambassadors of? What have we got to shout about? What is
the Good News? I will conclude with the briefest visit to two great
themes that help to shape our message.

1.  Jesus is my righteousness.

2.  I live under God's covenant of blessing.

"Jesus is my Righteousness" is the most astounding truth of the
Christian faith. Every other supposed path to God involves us being
judged or rewarded according to our own righteousness -- our own
attempts to live good lives and do what is right. The Gospel of Christ
is all about His righteousness on our behalf; His death for our
sinfulness; our complete acceptance to God because of what Christ alone
has done.

Those who trust in Jesus as their righteousness live without guilt or
shame; without trying to appease God by their religious observance. We
are set free to live confidently before God, pleasing Him by our joyful
faith. What a wonderful way to live!

But there is more. In addition to Jesus being my Righteousness, we also
live under a covenant of blessing. God sent Jesus to fulfil His promise
to Abraham:

> "I will bless you; and you will be a blessing. All peoples on earth
> will be blessed through you."

Whereas the Law was the hallmark of Moses ministry, blessing is the
hallmark of Jesus' ministry. He came to pronounce God's blessing upon
all who follow Him; on the poor in spirit; on those who mourn; on the
meek; on those who hunger and thirst for righteousness; on the merciful,
the pure in heart, the peacemakers and those who are persecuted for
righteousness' sake. He pronounced God's blessing on those who believe
without seeing, on those who hear the word of God and keep it, on those
who care for the poor, on those who lead through serving, on those who
fulfil God's calling on their lives and on those who watch for His
coming. He blessed the children, the sick and all those who attended His
ascension.

He has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the
heavenly places (Eph 1:3). God blesses us through answered prayer (2Cor
1:11) and with abundance in everything (2Cor 9:8) so that we can be
abundant in our blessing of others.

Living under this covenant of blessing gives us confidence in what we
do, courage to attempt new things, comfort when things go wrong,
perseverance to overcome obstacles and difficulties.

The LORD has risen upon us and his glory shines over us.
