---
title: 2017-08-06 Transfiguration
type: document
---
**The Transfiguration**

**Lu 9:22** And he said, "The Son of Man must suffer many things and be
rejected by the elders, chief priests and teachers of the law, and he
must be killed and on the third day be raised to life."

**Lu 9:28-36, 43-46** "About eight days after Jesus said this, he took
Peter, John and James with him and went up onto a mountain to pray. As
he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes
became as bright as a flash of lightning. Two men, Moses and Elijah,
appeared in glorious splendour, talking with Jesus. They spoke about his
departure, which he was about to bring to fulfilment at Jerusalem. Peter
and his companions were very sleepy, but when they became fully awake,
they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. As the men were
leaving Jesus, Peter said to him, "Master, it is good for us to be here.
Let us put up three shelters--- one for you, one for Moses and one for
Elijah." (He did not know what he was saying.) While he was speaking, a
cloud appeared and enveloped them, and they were afraid as they entered
the cloud. A voice came from the cloud, saying, "This is my Son, whom I
have chosen; listen to him." When the voice had spoken, they found that
Jesus was alone. The disciples kept this to themselves, and told no-one
at that time what they had seen. \... While everyone was marvelling at
all that Jesus did, he said to his disciples, "Listen carefully to what
I am about to tell you: The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the
hands of men." But they did not understand what this meant. It was
hidden from them, so that they did not grasp it, and they were afraid to
ask him about it. An argument started among the disciples as to which of
them would be the greatest.

Jesus knew that events would soon take a dramatic turn which would
devastate his friends and leave them thinking that everything they had
hoped for was utterly lost. The disciples had to be prepared; they
needed to know that the path ahead was going to be difficult to bear and
their faith would be severely tested. So as we read:

> v22: Jesus said, "The Son of Man must suffer many things and be
> rejected by the elders, chief priests and teachers of the law, and he
> must be killed and on the third day be raised to life."

But Jesus had a problem; the disciples had become selectively deaf.
Whenever He tried to talk to them about His coming death and
resurrection it was as if they put ear-muffs on. They understood well
enough when Jesus reprimanded the Pharisees for their hypocrisy, but
they could not understand when He spoke of His coming death. They simply
could not accept, and would not hear, that Jesus' life would lead to a
cross rather than a throne.

But this was not the only way Jesus tried to prepare them. As well as
telling them what was going to happen, He also went to great lengths to
show them who He was. Perhaps the most startling example was the raising
of Lazarus. On that occasion Jesus tried to prepare Mary and Martha and
the other disciples for what was going to happen. He told them that the
sickness would not end in death, but in God's glory. But they didn't get
it and when Lazarus died they all descended into grief and gloom and
misery. Jesus made sure there was no doubt about Lazarus' death by
leaving it four days and then raised Him to life again.

It was an object lesson in listening to and believing Jesus, no matter
what turns events took; and it was an object lesson in Jesus' power over
death. It was a dry-run for the cross and resurrection, but Jesus knew
they had not learnt the lesson.

So Jesus enlisted the Father's help.

Jesus asked Peter, James and John to accompany Him on His
prayer-retreat. Imagine the scene with me\...

James shows uncharacteristic interest in what Andrew is doing at the
weekend:

> "Hi Andrew, are you doing anything special this weekend? -- No! Oh
> well. -- Me? Oh. Well since you ask, Jesus has asked me to go with Him
> up Mount Horeb. You know, where God met Elijah. We are going to put in
> some serious prayer ... and fasting of course..."

So up Peter, James and John went with Jesus to the top of the mountain.
They soon found that what with the hard climb... and empty stomachs...
and the heat of the sun ... well they would be able to pray more
seriously after they had had a little nap.

And so the story unfolds. At its climax God spoke directly to the three
disciples:

> "This is my Son, whom I have chosen; listen to him."

God Himself told them they should pay close attention to what Jesus said
to them. We read he result in v44:

> Jesus said to his disciples, "Listen carefully to what I am about to
> tell you: The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of
> men." But they did not understand what this meant. It was hidden from
> them, so that they did not grasp it, and they were afraid to ask him.

It is quite extraordinary that even after that incredible encounter with
God the disciples still did not understand and were afraid to ask.

They did not understand His attempts to tell them what was going to
happen, but what about God's declaration:

> "This is my Son, whom I have chosen"?

How did that impact them? This should have been enough to convince them
that, come what may, no man could stand between God almighty and the Son
whom He has chosen. How could those three disciples ever doubt that God
would raise Jesus, just as He had raised Lazarus? Jesus always spoke of
His coming death as his Glorification. Clearly death was not the end, as
it wasn't for Lazarus.

Yet, as we know from the stories following Jesus' arrest, the disciples
despaired, thinking all was lost. They simply forgot all that Jesus had
said and all He had showed them.

## Lessons

So what are we to learn from this?

Well, there are many lessons we can draw from this episode. Let me
suggest just a few.

### Listening to Jesus

God told the disciples to listen to Jesus.

We can develop great skill at hearing what God is saying to everyone
else, "You should stop doing that, change your attitude, start helping
instead of complaining \..." We understand how the parables apply to
others and perhaps we make sure we read our bibles, pray and go to
church. But are we listening to what Jesus wants to say to us? The
closer to heart the issue is, the more difficult it is for us to hear.

Discipleship is not primarily learning about God and familiarity with
the scriptures but listening to Jesus and hearing what He says to us.
What is your response to God saying, "This is My Son. Listen to Him"?

Is God trying to speak to you about something you find difficult to
accept? Don't you think it is time you stopped and listened? God loves
you completely and only wants the best for your life. You can trust Him
in whatever He says to you.

### Believe who He is

God told the disciples that Jesus is God's chosen Son.

The fact that Jesus is God's Son gives great authority to His words. As
Jesus said so many times, His words are the Father's words. That means
that Jesus' promises are the Father's promises to us.

We can and should put great confidence in Jesus' promises. As Jesus
said, "You believe in God. Believe also in Me". It is not enough for us
to have vague beliefs about God and Jesus. Putting our faith and trust
in Jesus means putting our faith and trust in what He said; believing
the promises He gave us.

Do you struggle to accept and believe what Jesus said or the promises He
made? Listen to God's affirmation: "This is my Son, whom I have chosen".
God really wants you to trust Jesus entirely. He is trustworthy.

### Believe when it all goes wrong

The purpose of the mountain-top experience was not to have a spiritual
knees-up and a great story to tell, but to prepare the disciples for
when it all went pear-shaped.

Perhaps things are looking bad, or perhaps you are soon to face
challenging circumstances. What will govern your thoughts and emotions?
What would it have been like for Mary and Martha when Lazarus died and
for the disciples when Jesus was crucified if they had taken heed to
what Jesus had told them? Jesus said:

> "I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen
> you will believe.\"

What if they had believed? No doubt they would have still been confused
and shocked, but instead of grief and despair they would have had hope
and anticipation and wonder as they watched and waited to see how God
would fulfil His promises and glorify Himself.

What will we do? Will we look at the realities around us and conclude
that things are terrible? Or will we remember what God has said and
trust Him no matter what the evidence to the contrary?

Faith and trust in adversity is a tough option which others may mock or
despise, but it is our calling as believers. If you are willing to
believe, God will strengthen and help you in your belief.

### Feet on the ground, head in the air

In conclusion:

Jesus got the disciples feet up the mountain, but they left their heads
down on the plane! Gravity does a good job of keeping our feet on the
ground but we get to choose where we put our heads.

Jesus said that heaven and earth are passing away but His words will
never pass away. Paul says that we are seated with Christ in heavenly
places.

So where are you going to put your head? What do you see? Do you see
what God sees -- His everlasting promises? Or do you see the passing
substance of this world?

You can choose what to believe. You can choose what your mind dwells on.
Worry is meditating on the lies of the Devil. Faith is meditating on the
truth of God.

So listen to Jesus; believe He is God's chosen Son; and keep listening
and believing no matter how things develop.

Hear what Jesus says to you: "If you believe, you will see the Glory of
God." (Jn 11:40)

Stephen Dolley, 6 Aug 2017
