---
title: 2018-04-22 The Good Shepherd
type: document
---
# I am the good shepherd. Healing of the lame man.

**John 10:11-18** "I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down
his life for the sheep. The hired hand is not the shepherd and does not
own the sheep. So when he sees the wolf coming, he abandons the sheep
and runs away. Then the wolf attacks the flock and scatters it. The man
runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.

"I am the good shepherd; I know my sheep and my sheep know me--- just as
the Father knows me and I know the Father---and I lay down my life for
the sheep. I have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. I must
bring them also. They too will listen to my voice, and there shall be
one flock and one shepherd. The reason my Father loves me is that I lay
down my life---only to take it up again. No one takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down and
authority to take it up again. This command I received from my Father."

**Acts 4:5-12** The next day the rulers, the elders and the teachers of
the law met in Jerusalem. Annas the high priest was there, and so were
Caiaphas, John, Alexander and others of the high priest's family. They
had Peter and John brought before them and began to question them: "By
what power or what name did you do this?"

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them: "Rulers and
elders of the people! If we are being called to account today for an act
of kindness shown to a man who was lame and are being asked how he was
healed, then know this, you and all the people of Israel: It is by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified but whom God raised
from the dead, that this man stands before you healed. Jesus is 'the
stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.'
Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under
heaven given to mankind by which we must be saved."

## Preach

**"I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the
sheep \... No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord.
I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again."**

Today's reading takes us back to Good Friday. Good Friday comes from the
old English "God Friday"; the day when God the Son was killed. We tend
to think of Good Friday as the day when the corrupt and self-interested
religious leaders in Jerusalem abused their positions of authority and
murdered the innocent Jesus in order to try and protect their
self-interests. Good Friday was the day that Jesus was killed by wicked
men. Good Friday is the day when we especially show remorse for our
sinfulness which we share with those who crucified Him.

And that is of course all true. And yet there is not a hint of this
emphasis on our sin in this passage about the Good Shepherd. Indeed,
when we look carefully at the Gospels we discover that this focus on the
sinfulness of man that nailed Jesus to the Cross is completely missing.
It was not Jesus' perspective at all.

Our reading comes before the plot to kill Jesus was hatched, yet Jesus
talks at length about His coming death. He said that the proof that He
was the Good Shepherd, which Jeremiah had prophesied about, was that He
would *voluntarily* lay down His life for the sheep. "No one takes it
from me."

Jesus saw the cross long before anyone else and He described it, not as
an act of evil, but as His glorification. Indeed, Good Friday was the
day on which Jesus became King of the world. Each of the Gospel writers
makes this clear. John shows us that right from the beginning Jesus had
the cross in focus. At the wedding in Cana right at the beginning of
Jesus' ministry He says "My hour has not yet come." Later in the Gospel,
John repeatedly uses the phrase "the hour" to refer to the cross. Then
to Nicodemus Jesus said "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up" (John 3:14).

In scripture, "lift up" is always used as an expression of
glorification; "I will lift up your name\..."

Then as they approached Jerusalem at the beginning of His final week
Jesus said, "The hour has come that the Son of Man should be glorified.
Most assuredly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the
ground and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it produces much
grain" \... " Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince
of this world will be driven out. And I, if I am lifted up from the
earth, will draw all peoples to Myself." (John 12:23-24, 31-32)

These are remarkable words from a man facing an unjust execution! "I'm
going to be executed and in that moment I am going to drive out the
prince of this world and take his kingdom for Myself!"

Even as they were leaving for the betrayal in the Garden of Gethsemane
Jesus said, "Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in
Him. (John 13:31) And then in His prayer he said "Father, the hour has
come. Glorify Your Son, that Your Son also may glorify You." (John
17:1).

We see injustice and Peter saw humiliation, but Jesus sees glory!

John impresses upon us that Jesus did not view the cross as the terrible
consequence and price for our sin, but as the hour in which He was
glorified, and God was glorified in Him. It was the hour in which
healing came to turn back the plague of sin and sickness. It was the
hour in which Satan was judged and disarmed and defeated (Col 2:15). It
was the hour in which Jesus was lifted up to draw all peoples to Himself
as He purchased the church with His blood (Acts 20:28).

The Cross was when Jesus became King: The criminal hanging next to Him
said, "Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom." Jesus
answered him, "Truly I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise."
(Luke 23:42-43)

When Jesus said "I am the good shepherd" He pointed to his death on the
cross as His great act of delivering the sheep from the attacking wolf.
It was not the day that evil overcame good, but the day that good
overcame evil.

In a few moments we will be having Holy Communion. But the familiar
words of the Eucharistic prayer miss out some crucial words which all
the gospel accounts include. In the hours before His betrayal and
crucifixion Jesus was eagerly looking forward to the coming of His
Kingdom. When Jesus instituted the Breaking of Bread He took care to
direct our attention in the same direction. He said:

> "I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before I
> suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds
> fulfilment in the kingdom of God." After taking the cup, he gave
> thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. For I tell you I
> will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of
> God comes." (Luke 22:15-18)

It's as if Jesus is saying, "Yes I know the next bit is going to be
horrible for me and devastating for you, but that is not what this meal
is about. It is about the Kingdom coming. The breaking of My body and
pouring out of My blood is how the Kingdom will be inaugurated."

Jesus said he would not eat and drink again until the kingdom of God
comes. We do not have to wait for long!

On the day of the resurrection Jesus ate fish with the disciples, then
broke bread on the road to Emmaus, and shared breakfast with the
disciples on the shores of Galilee, and according to Peter, Jesus ate
and drank with many other witnesses of the resurrection (Acts 10:41).
The fact that Jesus ate and drank with so many after the resurrection
shows us that the Kingdom of God has indeed come.

And our reading from Acts demonstrates that the Kingdom has indeed come.
All the leaders in Jerusalem that had conspired together to kill Jesus
were confronted with the irrefutable evidence that Jesus was
establishing His kingdom through the disciples.

> "It is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified but
> whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you
> healed."

This is our Gospel message; that Jesus' Kingdom has come. Throughout the
New Testament the Gospel is called the Gospel of the Kingdom! The
Kingdom is established and demonstrated through lives being turned
around as they are healed and delivered; as they are born again through
faith and baptism in water and the Holy Spirit. This Kingdom, the
Kingdom that Jesus inaugurated on Good Friday and which the Breaking of
Bread commemorates, can only grow through the power of the Holy Spirit
which was given at Pentecost.

To share in the Passover meal is to share in longing and rejoicing in
the Kingdom coming on earth as it is in Heaven. It is to take hold of
the many and great promises so that through them we can share in the
Divine nature and do as Jesus did. Good Friday and Easter Sunday launch
us towards Pentecost; not as a festival of remembrance, but as an
invitation to share in the glorious mission of proclaiming the Kingdom
of God in the power of the Holy Spirit.

In conclusion, our Gospel reading is one passage amongst many that urge
us to see the cross through Jesus' eyes, not through worldly eyes. If we
do that, it refocuses our attention, away from our sin and our failures,
towards Jesus' victory over sin and our glorious inclusion as brothers
and sisters of Christ in His growing Kingdom on earth.

Paul says "Set your mind on things above, not on things on earth, for
YOU died and your life is hidden with Christ in God." (Col 3:2-3)
