---
title: 2019-07-14 Colossians 1
type: document
---
Colossians 1:1-14 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God,
and Timothy our brother, To God\'s holy people in Colossae, the faithful
brothers and sisters in Christ: Grace and peace to you from God our
Father. We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
we pray for you, because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and
of the love you have for all God\'s people--- the faith and love that
spring from the hope stored up for you in heaven and about which you
have already heard in the true message of the gospel that has come to
you. In the same way, the gospel is bearing fruit and growing throughout
the whole world---just as it has been doing among you since the day you
heard it and truly understood God\'s grace. You learned it from
Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ
on our behalf, and who also told us of your love in the Spirit. For this
reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped praying
for you. **We continually ask God to fill you with the knowledge of his
will through all the wisdom and understanding that the Spirit gives**,
so that you may live a life worthy of the Lord and please him in every
way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God,
being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so
that you may have great endurance and patience, and giving joyful thanks
to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of his
holy people in the kingdom of light. For he has rescued us from the
dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he
loves, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.

 

Luke 10:25-37 On one occasion an expert in the law stood up to test
Jesus. \"Teacher,\" he asked, \"what must I do to inherit eternal
life?\" \"What is written in the Law?\" he replied. \"How do you read
it?\" He answered, \"\'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and
with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind\';
and, \'Love your neighbor as yourself.\'\" \"You have answered
correctly,\" Jesus replied. \"Do this and you will live.\" But he wanted
to justify himself, so he asked Jesus, \"And who is my neighbor?\" In
reply Jesus said: \"A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, when
he was attacked by robbers. They stripped him of his clothes, beat him
and went away, leaving him half dead. A priest happened to be going down
the same road, and when he saw the man he passed by on the other side.
So too, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on
the other side. But a Samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was;
and when he saw him, he took pity on him. He went to him and bandaged
his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he put the man on his own
donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him. The next day he took
out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. \'Look after him\', he
said, \'and when I return, I will reimburse you for any extra expense
you may have.\' \"Which of these three do you think was a neighbor to
the man who fell into the hands of robbers?\" The expert in the law
replied, \"The one who had mercy on him.\" Jesus told him, \"Go and do
likewise.\"

 

James 3:13-18 Who is wise and understanding among you? Let them show it
by their good life, by deeds done in the humility that comes from
wisdom. But if you harbor bitter envy and selfish ambition in your
hearts, do not boast about it or deny the truth. Such \"wisdom\" does
not come down from heaven but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic. For
where you have envy and selfish ambition, there you find disorder and
every evil practice. But the wisdom that comes from heaven is first of
all pure; then peace-loving, considerate, submissive, full of mercy and
good fruit, impartial and sincere. Peacemakers who sow in peace reap a
harvest of righteousness.

 

> Proverbs 27:14 A loud and cheerful greeting early in the morning will
> be taken as a curse! NLT

Gathering

 

> Proverbs 21:2 Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, but the
> LORD weighs the heart. ESV

Confession

 

> Whoever conceals their sins does not prosper, but the one who
> confesses and renounces them finds mercy. Prov 28:13 NIV

Absolution

 

> The name of the LORD is a strong tower; the righteous man runs into it
> and is safe. Prov 18:10 ESV

Gloria

 

> The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the
> righteous. Prov 15:29 ESV

Collect

 

> Proverbs 30:5 Every word of God is pure; He is a shield to those who
> put their trust in Him. NKJ

Epistle

Hymn

Gospel

> Proverbs 20:29 The glory of young men is their strength, but the
> splendor of old men is their gray hair. ESV

**Sermon**

There are various kinds of wisdom. There is the wisdom that comes from
maths, which is formally provable. There is wisdom from science which is
evidence based but not generally formally provable. Then there is the
wisdom that comes from the arts which is not provable and is much more
to do with human behaviour and is meant to provoke thought and
discussion.

Then we have the wisdom that comes from religion, which is a kind of
refined and tested arts-type wisdom. This wisdom has survived hundreds
of years of human experience and been found to be solidly good advice.
All of these kinds of wisdom are natural, human wisdom -- and of course
they are all valuable.

Biblical wisdom is especially valuable and worth learning. Jesus made
much use of Biblical wisdom in his teaching and several times quoted or
used Proverbs. Our Gospel reading shows Jesus applying bible-wisdom in
answer to the question about inheriting eternal life.

But there were many times when Jesus seemed to ignore biblical wisdom
and do the opposite.

How about \" A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up
anger.\" Prov 15:1

"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are
like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the
inside are full of the bones of the dead and everything unclean.\" Matt
23:27

or \"The prudent man sees danger and hides himself, but the simple go on
and suffer for it.\" Prov 22:3

\"From that time on Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he must
go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, the
chief priests and the teachers of the law, and that he must be killed
and on the third day be raised to life.\" Matt 16:21

\"A fool's lips enter into contention, And his mouth calls for blows. A
fool's mouth is his destruction, And his lips are the snare of his
soul.\" Prov 18:6-7 NKJ

Luke 4, Jesus preaches in Nazareth and they are all amazed. \"All spoke
well of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his
lips. "Isn't this Joseph's son?" they asked.\" v22.

Then he provokes then into outrage and they try to throw Him off a
cliff! \"All the people in the synagogue were furious when they heard
this. They got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow
of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him off the
cliff.\" v28-29

According to all these biblical proverbs, Jesus was a fool! But only a
fool would say that Jesus was a fool!

There is another source of wisdom which trumps all the others. This
wisdom comes from the Holy Spirit. It is the kind of wisdom that Jesus
lived by and it is what Paul prays for the believers in Colossae.

> **We continually ask God to fill you with the knowledge of his will
> through all the wisdom and understanding that the Spirit gives\...**

This kind of wisdom overrides common sense, religious duties, keeping
out of other people\'s problems, worrying about what people might think.

Even in our Gospel reading there is a twist. Jesus\' answer about \"who
is my neighbour\" is more than an illustration about helping people in
need. Jesus deliberately made his illustration deeply offensive. He
could easily have made the hero an ordinary Jewish citizen, but He
deliberately cast the hero as a despised Samaritan. This is definitely a
case of wilfully stirring up an argument.

So was Jesus simply a rude northerner? No doubt that is what the posh
southerner\'s thought, but Jesus claimed that he said what the Father
gave Him to say.

Wouldn\'t it be great if we could all say that truthfully? Jesus clearly
had a hot-line to God but what about the rest of us?

Jesus said that His sheep hear His voice and there are many promises
that God speaks to those who listen to Him. We too can have the wisdom
from the Holy Spirit, and that is what Paul prayed for, for the
believers in Colossae.

But God tends to speak in a still-small voice, quietly and gently into
our spirits. To hear Him we need to practice quietening our hearts and
listening for His voice. This not easy or popular in a world that is
frantic with activity. We can easily become lost in silence. We surround
ourselves with music or speech. Everywhere you go it seems we have to
have background music, or the TV constantly on in the background.

But allow yourself to imagine for a moment what it might be like to hear
God speak to you? It could be anything from a faint and uncertain
whisper to something that is unmistakably clear. He speaks in different
ways at different times -- but he promises to speak. Would you like to
hear God speak to you?

Then practice listening. When you pray, try giving as much time to
listening as you do to speaking.

When you read the bible, don\'t rush. Listen. Ask Jesus if he wants to
speak to you about anything through the passage. Try to develop a quiet
listening spirit. In time, if you practice and persist you will begin to
hear Him. You can practice listening with a friend, sitting in silence
and then asking each other what thoughts came to mind and discussing if
you think it might have been God speaking.

An ideal place to practice is in discipleship groups. What do you think
Jesus might want to say to you through the passage you have read, what
do you think Jesus might have been saying through the previous week,
what might Jesus be saying as you listen in prayer.

Jesus promised us wisdom from above, Paul prayed for wisdom from above
-- Is hearing God something worth practicing?

Creed

Intercessions

Peace

Communion

 

Proverbs 26:11 As a dog returns to its vomit, so a fool repeats his
foolishness. NLT

 

Proverbs 1:7 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge, but
fools despise wisdom and instruction. NIV

 

Proverbs 9:8 Do not reprove a scoffer, or he will hate you; reprove a
wise man, and he will love you.

 

Proverbs 12:23 The wise don\'t make a show of their knowledge, but fools
broadcast their foolishness. NLT

 

Proverbs 27:6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend, But the kisses of an
enemy are deceitful. NKJ

 

Proverbs 17:9 Whoever covers an offense seeks love, but he who repeats a
matter separates close friends. ESV

 

Proverbs 26:18-19 Like a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and death
is the man who deceives his neighbor and says, \"I am only joking!\" ESV

 

Proverbs 25:27 It is not good to eat much honey, nor is it glorious to
seek one\'s own glory. ESV

 

Proverbs 19:24 The sluggard buries his hand in the dish and will not
even bring it back to his mouth. ESV

 

Proverbs 14:4 Where there are no oxen, the trough is clean, but abundant
crops come by the strength of the ox. ESV

 

Proverbs 11:25 The generous soul will be made rich, And he who waters
will also be watered himself. NKJ

 

Proverbs 28:1 The wicked flee when no one pursues, But the righteous are
bold as a lion. NKJ
