---
title: 2020-03-08 John 3_1-17
type: document
---
John 3:1-17 Now there was a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus who was a
member of the Jewish ruling council. He came to Jesus at night and said,
"Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God. For no one
could perform the signs you are doing if God were not with him."

Jesus replied, "Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God
unless they are born again. " "How can someone be born when they are
old?" Nicodemus asked. "Surely they cannot enter a second time into
their mother's womb to be born!"

Jesus answered, "Very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of
God unless they are born of water and the Spirit. Flesh gives birth to
flesh, but the Spirit gives birth to spirit. You should not be surprised
at my saying, 'You must be born again.'

The wind blows wherever it pleases. You hear its sound, but you cannot
tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone
born of the Spirit." "How can this be?" Nicodemus asked. "You are
Israel's teacher," said Jesus, "and do you not understand these things?
Very truly I tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to what
we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.

Nicodemus came for a private consultation, curious to discover more
about who Jesus really was. Was Jesus genuine?

> \"We know that you are a teacher who has come from God\"

But Jesus, as is so often the case, answers a different question:

> "Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they
> are born again. "

There is a really important lesson for us here: we often ask the wrong
questions of God. And other people often ask us the wrong questions
about our faith. I have found it helpful to try to discern whether the
question is an \"obedience avoidance\" question or an \"obedience
embracing\" question. Jesus doesn\'t answer \"obedience avoidance\"
questions. Instead he turns the conversation towards obedience.

Two of the questions I have most frequently been asked are \"What about
people who have never heard about Jesus\" and \"What about all the
suffering in the world\"? I try to answer these questions with replies
like \"Perhaps Jesus is calling you to go and tell those people about
Him\", or \"Would you like to get involved in a charity that alleviates
poverty and suffering?\" An obedience oriented reply quickly exposes the
underlying motive for the question.

This is what Jesus does here. Nicodemus is looking for a lively
discussion about who Jesus is and whether he fits the prophetic profile
of the Messiah. But Jesus is interested in Nicodemus as a disciple. And
for that Nicodemus needs to come to terms with an uncomfortable and very
personal truth:

> \"No one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born again.\"

The term \"born again\" was well understood in Jesus\' day. It referred
to a Gentile who converted to Judaism through circumcision and baptism.
And as is typical of Jewish law, such a person had a new legal identity
even to the extent that any debts they had did not transfer to their new
identity. Being able to have your debts legally cancelled was an
attractive possibility. We can imagine a Jew wringing his hands with an
unpayable debt going to their rabbi and asking if they can somehow
convert to paganism so that they can then convert back and be born
again, like a Gentile convert -- so having their debt cancelled. He
would be sent home with a shaking of the finger. No Jew could be born
again. They were already Jews!

Now the point of a Gentile being born again was not to get their debts
cancelled, but to become a member of God\'s chosen people, God\'s
family, to enter the Kingdom of God.

So for Nicodemus to hear Jesus tell him he must be born again to enter
God\'s Kingdom is a profound and confusing shock. Jesus tells Nicodemus
that, as he stands, he is not in God\'s Kingdom. \"No one can see the
kingdom of God unless they are born again.\"

In this one short statement Jesus challenges two deeply embedded Jewish
beliefs: firstly that God\'s Kingdom and the Jewish nation are one and
the same thing; and secondly that faithful devotion to God ensures you
will receive God\'s welcome.

Nicodemus is hardly an unbeliever! He is a spiritual man, who has
devoted his life to seeking and following God. He is a prominent teacher
amongst God\'s chosen people, Israel. He is well educated, widely read,
deeply respected, and profoundly devoted. He has memorised scripture, he
fasts twice a week and prays many times a day. It makes no sense to him
for Jesus to tell him he must be born again before he can be part of
God\'s Kingdom!

This was the difficulty that Jesus faced with Nicodemus. Nicodemus
firmly believed that he was already in God\'s Kingdom; yet for him to
come to God in the way he needed to, he needed to accept the shocking
truth that he was not who he thought he was; that spiritual reality is
not what he thinks it is.

So many good and kind unbelievers think that if there is a loving God,
as Christians claim, then he will obviously welcome them into heaven. A
good God would never turn away good people!

This is one of the most difficult things for us to tell our
non-Christian friends. In a culture where we are supposed to be all
inclusive and non-discriminatory and where it is assumed that all faiths
and no faith are all equal, it is shocking to tell someone that they
cannot see God without a profound and all-embracing encounter with
Jesus. But this is what Jesus does.

Jesus was not being judgemental, or harsh, or setting himself above
Nicodemus. He could have answered Nicodemus\' question and satisfied his
curiosity. But Jesus loves Nicodemus, and that meant helping him to
understand that things were not as he believed them to be.

For many people, this is not so difficult. I have friends who readily
acknowledge that I have something they don\'t have. It\'s not about how
holy I am, but about the assurance of faith and the intimacy of my
relationship with God. They say things like, \"I envy you for your
faith. I wish I had a faith like yours, but I just can\'t bring myself
to believe in God.\"

But I have other friends who don\'t envy me at all. They are quite happy
for me to have my faith, and are happy to have none themselves. And of
course, some despise me for my faith, seeing it as a deceptive, harmful
and foolish crutch.

But I\'m sure we all have non-Christian friends who are wonderfully
generous and kind and who think that if God exists, He will welcome them
into His Kingdom because they are good people. For us to tell them that
they have got it wrong; that to be welcomed into God\'s Kingdom they
need to be born-again; that is hard. What can we say?

Perhaps we can invite them to read this encounter between Nicodemus and
Jesus.

Nicodemus is so shocked by Jesus\' statement that he throws it back to
Jesus as an absurdity. \"How can someone be born-again as a Jew when
they are already a Jew?\" "Surely they cannot enter a second time into
their mother's womb to be born!" Jesus elaborates on His previous
statement:

> \"No one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water
> and the Spirit. Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the Spirit gives birth
> to spirit.\"

John the Baptist was widely known and respected. He established baptism
as a gateway into the Kingdom of God. The prophets also spoke of the New
Covenant involving our hearts being washed clean. So to be born of water
and the Spirit means to be baptised in water and born-again by the inner
working of the Holy Spirit. Nicodemus\' fleshly birth as a Jew only made
him a Jew -- it didn\'t make him spiritually alive. Only God can do that
for us.

> \"You should not be surprised at my saying, 'You must be born again.'
> \"

When a friend says to us \"I just don\'t have your faith\" it is them
recognising that there is a seemingly insurmountable difference between
us. It\'s not just that we are naturally religious -- it is because God
has changed our hearts and enabled us to believe -- that is what being
born again does to us. This story helps us to convey this truth to them.
If they are at all open perhaps they will ask \"So how can this happen
to me?\" Of course we can pray with them and encourage them to pray, but
truly it is something that is in God\'s hands, not ours. The scriptures
that Nicodemus knew so well tell those seek God\'s salvation to \"wait
on the Lord.\" We need to find a quiet garden to sit in and wait for the
Lord!\" Jesus said to Nicodemus:

> The wind blows wherever it pleases. You hear its sound, but you cannot
> tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone
> born of the Spirit."

With this metaphor Jesus emphasises that to be born again requires
God\'s action -- it is not something we can do for ourselves.

This happened quite literally for my relative Nicolas. He was sitting in
a garden, as an unbeliever, seeking God but finding he simply could not
believe. Suddenly a wind blew through the garden and he was born again.
Suddenly he believed. Earlier in the Gospel John says:

> \"to all who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he
> gave the right to become children of God--- children born not of
> natural descent, nor of human decision or a husband's will, but born
> of God.\"

John makes the same point, that to be born again as a child of God, God
must act in our hearts -- it is not just a matter of our decision. We
can and should ask God -- and encourage our unbelieving friends to ask
God -- but we are dependent on God changing us and enabling us to
believe.

> "How can this be?" Nicodemus asked. "You are Israel's teacher," said
> Jesus, "and do you not understand these things?

For people who are used to making their own choices and determining
their own future it is hard to accept that something as vital as faith
in God is not in our control. To have to throw ourselves on God\'s mercy
and admit that we do not have what it takes is a humiliating act for a
proud person. But is a necessary beginning for a lifetime of learning to
live in dependence upon God.

Nicodemus came to question Jesus\' validity, but Jesus got Nicodemus to
examine his own heart. He gives a pattern and a story to help us talk to
our friends. I hope that I have helped you to understand a little more
about this encounter between Jesus and Nicodemus, and perhaps given you
some ideas about how you might share this passage with an interested
unbeliever at an appropriate time.

On the mount of transfiguration, God said to the three disciples, \"This
is My Son. Listen to Him.\" That is God\'s appeal to our unbelieving
friends. But it is also God\'s appeal to each one of us. Listen to
Jesus. I want to finish with the next words that Jesus says to
Nicodemus:

> \"Very truly I tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to
> what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.\"

This claim of Jesus is of the utmost most importance to each one of us.
Its implications are profound and life changing. Jesus was not simply a
wise and insightful teacher. It wasn\'t that he had an unusual or
revolutionary take on the Law. Jesus claims that His teachings come from
what he knows and has seen. Using the Royal \"we\" Jesus says:

> \"We speak of what we know, and we testify to what we have seen.\"

When He spoke, He spoke from what He had seen, not just what He thought.
This being-born-again business was not just a metaphor for a change of
mind, it was a metaphor for something that really happens and which
really changes us and which only God Himself can do for us.

It is a scary business to read the Gospels knowing that what Jesus said
is actually really true. The more deeply we believe this claim of Jesus,
the more deeply we will be changed. When we really believe His promises
we will become bold in our faith, our prayers and our actions.

In our world where so much emphasis is placed on education and
understanding, it is all too easy to focus on understanding when we read
scripture. But Jesus is no so interested in the depth of our
understanding. He is interested in us. He is the Word of Life. He is our
food and drink. His words are true and shocking and life-changing.

Let us pray:

Lord, change our hearts and open our eyes and ears so that as we read
the Gospels the hairs on our necks stand on end. Lord, teach us to eat
you and drink you as food for our souls as we meditate on your word.
Lord, move us from understanding to life-shaping encounter. Lord, teach
us to listen to you. Teach us to wait for you. And help us to bring our
friends into their own encounter with Jesus.

Amen.
