---
title: HG-Character study of Mary
type: document
---
Mary

Luke 1:26-38

V 28,30: Do you think Mary had been praying to be the mother of the
Messiah? (See also vv46-49) If so, who was she anticipating and longing
for the father to be?

V34: So why did she not assume this, rather than say "How shall this
be?"

V 37-38 "Nothing is impossible for God" and Mary believed. Are there
things we find it difficult to believe God for? Has God said those
things to us? Do we need God to speak before we can / should believe?

Matt 1:18 "She was found with child" -- suggests she did not tell her
parents and Joseph about the angel's visit at the time. Instead she
immediately (in haste) went to visit Elizabeth, (Lk 1:39).

Why might this have been? What would you have done (i.e. telling Joseph
and her parents?)

Lk 1:39-45 Elizabeth gave great confirmation to Mary of what the angel
had said.

Lk 1:46-55 Magnificat -- she clearly knew her scripture -- all psalms!
(Cf. 1 Sam 2:1-10)

What things does she praise God for? What does this tell us about Mary?

v56: Mary returned home probably after John was born. Only then does it
seem she told her parents and Joseph of her pregnancy (Matt 1:18 -- Mary
was found to be with child, the response was to her evident pregnancy,
not simply to her claim from the Angel).

Matt 1:19. Joseph clearly didn't believe Mary's story! Why do you think
this was when Mary was such a pious person? How would they each have
felt? Joseph betrayed by Mary. Mary betrayed by God?

But God answered in a dream (Matt 1:20-23). Are you more convinced by
dreams than the cold light of day?

But the rest of the community seem to not have been persuaded, for when
Jesus was born after only 6 months of marriage, Jesus lived with the
rumour that he was born of fornication (John 8:41)

Lk 2:7, 16-20. What does v19, 33,51 tell us about Mary's character? --
No hasty conclusions, nothing missed or forgotten even if she didn't
know what to make of it.

What sorts of things do we treasure in our hearts? Has God spoken
anything to us that we have treasured like this?

Lk 2:34-35 "A sword will pierce your heart also" It is relatively
unusual for God to forewarn us of suffering ahead, as we might shrink
back in worry. Why do you think God for-warned Mary in this way?

Matt 2:11- 16 What a sudden and dramatic turn of events after the visit
of the magi! They would have wanted to return to Nazareth, but instead
had to flee to Egypt.

What "survivor's guilt" might Mary have to live with after fleeing to
Egypt? Why do you think God was able to get foreign kings to travel all
that way in worship, but did not prevent Herod from killing all those
innocent children?

Mary had to care for the family in a foreign land without any family
support.

Why did God's purposes for Israel's salvation have to be protected by
fleeing to a foreign land?

What ways of God cause us the most perplexity?

Lk 2:48-51 What does this incident tell us about Mary. The anxiety of
growing teenagers? -- She did not understand all that was happening, but
she respected Jesus.

Jn 2:3-5. Wedding.

Both at the wedding and at the cross (Jn 19:26) Jesus refers to Mary as
"Woman" rather than "mother". And when told his mother and brothers are
calling for him he says "Who are my mother and brothers..." Mk 3:31-34.
How might Mary have felt about this? What was Jesus saying?

Mary had to let Jesus go as all mothers do when their children grow up.

Jn 7:5 At this time ever her other sons were unbelievers. Mary knew the
pain of unbelieving children and the perplexity of God "hiding" himself
from them. If even Jesus' own brothers did not believe in him, we should
not be too harsh on ourselves if our family do not see Christ very
clearly in us.

Mary travelled with the disciples to Jerusalem knowing there was a plot
to kill him. She stayed to watch when the disciples fled.

Mary and her sons, who now believed in Jesus, were with the apostles in
prayer after the ascension (Acts 1:13-14).

What effect might these incidents have had on Mary's faith?

How would you describe her character?
