---
title: Jesus avoidance
type: document
---
Matt 10:1 (Message) Jesus called twelve of his followers and sent them
into the ripe fields. He gave them power to kick out the evil spirits
and to tenderly care for the bruised and hurt lives.

Matt 10:1 (NIV) Jesus called his twelve disciples to him and gave them
authority to drive out impure spirits and to heal every disease and
sickness.

I want to talk with you about what I term Jesus avoidance. We see plenty
of examples of this in the scriptures and I suspect that it is something
we all do to some extent, often without realising it.

Let\'s start with my first example.

> "Many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
> But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all people."
> (Jn 2:24)

This is a comment about many people who "saw the signs he was performing
and believed in his name". These sound like good solid Christians. If
you met someone in a cafÃ© who said, "Oh Jesus! He's amazing. He healed
my bad back and forgave my sins. I'm so excited about knowing Jesus. He
truly is the only Son of God my creator." Now I would be pretty sure
such a person was saved! So why does John tell us that "Jesus would not
entrust himself to them, for he knew all people."?

Jesus said "whoever comes to me I will never drive away" so I suggest to
you that the problem here was that these believers in Jesus were in fact
suffering from "Jesus Avoidance". They believed in Him but would not
give themselves to Him. Like these crowds we can rejoice that Jesus is
our saviour and cheer Him on, but Jesus is not looking for fans or
followers.

Here's my next example: The Scribes were diligent in studying the
scriptures and were devoted to understanding and teaching God's word.
But Jesus said to them:

> "You study the Scriptures diligently because you think that in them
> you have eternal life. These are the very Scriptures that testify
> about me, yet you refuse to come to me to have life." (Jn 5:39)

The scribes suffered from Jesus Avoidance. They loved study and
knowledge and understanding. They could preach well and explain the
nuances of doctrine. They knew all the background context and the
meanings of the words in the original language. They knew and believed
that the scriptures were the inspired word of the Eternal God and
contained the truths that we needed to live by. But in all of this they
avoided Jesus. Not discussion about Him, but the man Himself.

Like these scribes we can be devoted to bible reading and learning all
about Jesus, but Jesus is clearly not impressed with our understanding
of doctrine or our knowledge of the scriptures. The pursuit of knowledge
and understanding can be a Jesus Avoidance strategy.

The Pharisees provide my next example. They weren't all caught up with
abstract bible study, they were practical put-it-into-practice types. I
know they get a bad press, but perhaps that is because they were the
closest to fulfilling our calling. Jesus himself would have been viewed
as a Pharisee -- a lay teacher. Their passion was to take the
scriptures, particularly the law, and apply it to everyday life. They
were zealous for their faith to touch every aspect of all our lives. The
Pharisees ran the synagogues in which Jesus frequently taught and He
commended them for their teaching:

> "You must be careful to do everything they tell you. But do not do
> what they do, for they do not practice what they preach. They tie up
> heavy, cumbersome loads and put them on other people's shoulders, but
> they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them." (Matt
> 23:1)

If we are serious about our faith and putting it into practice, then we
need to particularly close attention to what Jesus said to the
Pharisees. They were lay-people who out of love for God ran the
services, they organised the worship and the welcomers, made sure the
place was kept clean and that there was tea and coffee afterwards. They
invited Jesus to preach and engaged Him in conversation and debate.
Commitment was what the Pharisees excelled in.

Like these Pharisees, we might be committed to church and faithful in
our religious observance, but Jesus said to them, \"Therefore I tell you
that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a
people who will produce its fruit." (Matt 21:43) Devout people can also
suffer from Jesus Avoidance.

Even Jesus closest friends practiced Jesus Avoidance. Martha avoided Him
by making herself busy serving Jesus.

My final example is the toughest of all:

> Jesus says: "Many will say to me on that day, 'Lord, Lord, did we not
> prophesy in your name and in your name drive out demons and in your
> name perform many miracles?' Then I will tell them plainly, 'I never
> knew you.'" (Matt 7:22)

What on earth is wrong here? These people are prophesying and healing
the sick in Jesus Name! Surely such people are the most committed
believers Jesus could wish to have -- even performing miracles in His
name! What more can Jesus possibly want? But again we see Jesus
Avoidance: Jesus said "I never knew you."

These are some of the uncomfortable sayings of Jesus which somehow never
found their way into the liturgies. Now I have not come here to bring
condemnation or fear or doubt, but to invite you to consider with me the
cause of Jesus Avoidance, and to invite the Holy Spirit to show us if
and where we are practicing Jesus Avoidance.

I'm sure there are many causes of Jesus Avoidance, but let me share some
that I have found within myself.

1.  The lust for knowledge and understanding. I am guilty of having
    > shared in the scribes Jesus Avoidance strategy. I have loved bible
    > study and theological debate and for many years immersed myself in
    > the scriptures, both Old and New Testament. I have memorised
    > hundreds of verses of scripture and studied just about every book
    > of the bible. But I have given proportionately much less attention
    > to the Gospels. They are not very exciting doctrinally and the
    > parables and healing stories are so familiar that it is difficult
    > to get very excited about them. The more difficult epistles and
    > Revelation are far more engaging to the intellect. My love of
    > knowledge has unwittingly kept me from encountering the living
    > Jesus. It has been an exercise in Jesus Avoidance. I don't regret
    > my studies, but I wish I had been alert to Jesus Avoidance 30
    > years ago.

2.  The difficult promises of Jesus. The Gospels contain the most
    > outrageous promises. They have seemed unattainable and
    > consequently, practically irrelevant. "Those who believe in me
    > will do the works that I do and greater works than these will they
    > do..." "If you believe in your heart then this mountain will be
    > cast into the sea." The promises of Jesus cause us great
    > difficulty and consequently I have tended to avoid them, and avoid
    > the Gospels as a whole. The doctrines about Jesus are fine, but
    > the man Himself is too difficult. I have practiced Jesus
    > Avoidance.

3.  The difficult sayings of Jesus. The promises of Jesus are difficult,
    > but so are many of his sayings and parables. Even something as
    > innocent as His advice to the disciples on their mission to preach
    > the Gospel. Why did he say they should not wear sandals? I have no
    > idea! In fact I have found that much of what Jesus said leaves me
    > confounded. If we can get beyond the familiarity we find countless
    > little details that are not easy to understand or even make sense
    > of. After one such discourse John tells us that many of His
    > disciples stopped following Him. The Gospels are either too
    > familiar or too difficult! Give me a Psalm or a letter any day! So
    > this is another reason I have practiced Jesus Avoidance.

4.  The lust of busyness. Most of us like to keep busy. If we didn't we
    > wouldn't be so busy. In fact one of the most important aspects of
    > church growth is to give new members a job to do in the church.
    > Busyness saves us from idle time. And idle time is dangerous
    > because it gives us time to reflect. And reflection can be bad for
    > our health. Martha knew that busyness in Christian things is a
    > great Jesus Avoidance Strategy. "Lord, Lord, did I not do x,y and
    > z in your name...?" If we busy ourselves in the most devoted and
    > committed way we can avoid having to face up to the challenge of
    > Jesus.

5.  The need to achieve. I guess most of us have a strong desire to
    > achieve something and an aversion to the things we feel we cannot
    > achieve. The bottom line for me when all my other efforts to
    > achieve something failed was to descale the kettle. It's not a
    > problem up here because the water is soft. So now I clean the
    > house. Even if in other areas of my life I might struggle to
    > achieve measurable progress, at least I can clean the bathroom. It
    > makes me feel better. I have a deep and powerful need to achieve.
    > I also need this in my relationship with God. But what can I
    > achieve in that area? I can learn some more scriptures, I can read
    > a new commentary, I can get into a new aspect of theology. I can
    > maintain a discipline of reading or prayer. I can pray through a
    > prayer list, give to the poor, help with some event. But the one
    > thing I can't achieve is the presence and power of Jesus. I can't
    > control when God speaks to me. I can't produce passion for Jesus,
    > or love for my fellow men. I can't produce mountain moving faith.
    > I can't just get up and start healing the sick. I fact I can't do
    > most of what Jesus said I should do. The Gospel is basically
    > unachievable -- at least in the terms I am used to when it comes
    > to achievement. Jesus is just plain too difficult. Better to avoid
    > direct eye contact.

No doubt there are many other causes for Jesus Avoidance strategies, and
I can assure you that I am well practiced at many of them. So what are
we to do? How can we put an encounter with Jesus back into the heart of
everything we do? As yet I don't have many answers, but I have had a
series of small breakthroughs in recent months which have encouraged me
and I have become much more aware of the issue in my life.

1.  I invite you to ask the Holy Spirit to search your heart and help
    > you to start seeing your own Jesus Encounter strategies.

2.  Try to put yourself in the places and situations Jesus likes to be
    > in.

3.  Immerse yourself in the gospels.
