---
title: New Perspectives on Paul - SJD notes
type: document
---
It makes sense of Paul\'s positive comments about the law in Romans and
his negative comments on Galatians.

When Paul talks about the Jews trying to establish their righteousness
through the law, he means establishing their membership of God\'s
covenant people, by which they are justified - not their moral
perfection.

Whenever Paul discusses justification it is in the context of a critique
of Judaism and the unity of God\'s people in Christ.

The gospel is always the climax of the Jewish covenant with Jesus as
this world\'s true and only king and Lord. It is not \"this is how you
can be saved\" but \"Jesus is lord\"

God\'s righteousness is his faithfulness to this covenant.

Paul believed that the proclaimed that Jesus is lord is empowered by the
holy spirit to bring conversion. It is primarily a summons to obedience.
Thus, no one can say\"Jesus is lord\" except by the holy spirit.

Paul\'s phrase, \"the righteousness of God\" (often wrongly translated
as righteousness from God, esp in Rom 3:21-26) always refers to his
faithfulness to the covenant, to rescue and justify his people. But it
also includes his judgement of the wicked. Thus\...

Romans 2:5-7 But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant
heart, you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of God\'s
wrath, when his righteous judgment will be revealed. God \"will repay
each person according to what they have done. To those who by
persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will
give eternal life.\"

This covenant faithfulness is why the gospel expounded in Romans leads
from chapter 8 into chapter 9.

Justification is not God imputing righteousness to us now, but
pronouncing our belonging to him on judgement day on which we will be
judged according to our works, which for a Christian, will be found
acceptable. They are the works which demonstrate the life of the spirit
in us. Phil 1:6. Those are the putting to death of the deeds of the
flesh by the life of the spirit- Rom 8:1-17.

Notice how Paul boasts of the evidence in his own life in the disciples
he has made. 1thes 3:19, Phil 2:16.

 

We are justified by faith in Christ in the sense that we rightly
anticipate that future declaration because through faith in Chris as
lord we are included in God\'s people.

The proper meaning of being justified is not to have righteousness
imputed to us, but having a judgement made about us.

God does indeed count us righteous because we believe. But that
righteousness is not God\'s righteousness, or Christ\'s righteousness,
but the righteousness of being one of God\'s children.

A person is saved by hearing the announcement that Jesus is lord,
believing this to be true and giving themselves to obedience and bring
baptised

This constitutes their call, as Paul puts it in Rom 8:29ff. And
celebrates in Ephesians 1.

After the call, on judgement day we will be justified and glorified.

1 Corinthians 6:11 And such were some of you. But you were washed, but
you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus and by the Spirit of our God.

Remember that Justification is a declaration of a fact, not its
impartation.

Justification by faith is the anticipation of that ultimate verdict. We
can be sure of that verdict, because Jesus was vindicated in his
resurrection, and we are in him. Rom 6.

Justification is therefore not about how we are saved, but assurance
that we are saved.

 

Membership of God\'s people and final Justification are synonymous, one
goes with the other. Hence

Romans 3:28-29 Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith
apart from the deeds of the law. Or \[is He\] the God of the Jews only?
\[Is He\] not also the God of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also,

 

Thus explains why Paul is so rejecting of the identity aspects of the
law, and do insistent on the moral aspects of the law.
