---
title: New Perspectives on Paul
type: document
---
New Perspectives on Paul

**Delivered at the Tenth Edinburgh Dogmatics Conference**

[Introduction]{.ul}

I am grateful for the invitation to this conference, and for the
sensitive way in which the organisers responded to my comments on the
initial outline of the programme. I am aware that fresh interpretations
of Paul, including my own, have caused controversy in evangelical
circles, and particularly reformed circles. My own name has been linked
with proposals which have been variously dismissed, scorned, vilified
and anathematized. Having heard the papers yesterday morning and
afternoon I suggested to David Searle that I should take two hours not
one to say what needs to be said just now; but when I heard Tony Lane
last night I realised I would need, like Cardinal Seripando at Trent,
two days to establish my own orthodoxy. We shall see.

There are several different agendas coming together at this point. The
issue is sometimes treated as a variation on old modernist
controversies, at other times as a clash between a Christian absolutism
and a religious relativism, and at other times as a variation on a
perceived protestant/catholic divide (or even a high-church/low-church
divide), with the so-called new perspective focussing on ecclesiology
rather than soteriology and being condemned for so doing. And that's
just the beginning. From time to time correspondents draw my attention
to various websites on which you can find scathing denunciations of me
for abandoning traditional protestant orthodoxy and puzzled rejoinders
from people who have studied my work and know that I'm not saying what
many of my critics say I'm saying. Go to amazon.com and look at the
comments which anonymous correspondents have appended to some of my
books.

Faced with that kind of problem, it would take a whole book to unpick
the strands, to disentangle them from other issues, to explain what the
so-called New Perspective is and isn't, and to argue exegetically step
by step for a particular reading of Paul. Clearly I can't do that here.
What I shall do instead is to make two opening remarks about my aim and
method on the one hand and the problem of the New Perspective on the
other, and then to attempt once more to say briefly what I think needs
to be said about Paul and justification, sharpening up the issues here
and there.

First, as to aim and method. When I began research on Paul, thirty years
ago this autumn, my aim was to understand Paul in general and Romans in
particular better than I had done before, as part of my heartfelt and
lifelong commitment to scripture, and to the *sola scriptura* principle,
believing that the better the church understands and lives by scripture
the better its worship, preaching and common life will be. I was
conscious of thereby standing methodologically in the tradition of the
reformers, for whom exegesis was the lifeblood of the church, and who
believed that scripture should stand over against all human traditions.
I have not changed this aim and this method, nor do I intend to. Indeed,
the present controversy, from my own point of view, often appears to me
in terms of a battle for the Reformers' *aims and methods* -- going back
to scripture over against all human tradition -- against some of their
theological positions (and, equally, those of their opponents, since I
believe that often both sides were operating with mistaken
understandings of Paul). I believe that Luther, Calvin, and many of the
others would tell us to read scripture afresh, with all the tools
available to us -- which is after all what they did -- and to treat
their own doctrinal conclusions as important but not as important as
scripture itself. That is what I have tried to do, and I believe I am
honouring them thereby.

Allow me, if you will, a moment of autobiography, for reasons similar to
those of Paul in Galatians 1 and 2. In my early days of research, before
Sanders had published *Paul and Palestinian Judaism* in 1977 and long
before Dunn coined the phrase 'The New Perspective on Paul', I was
puzzled by one exegetical issue in particular, which I here oversimplify
for the sake of summary. If I read Paul in the then standard Lutheran
way, Galatians made plenty of sense, but I had to fudge (as I could see
dozens of writers fudging) the positive statements about the Law in
Romans. If I read Paul in the Reformed way of which, for me, Charles
Cranfield remains the supreme exegetical exemplar, Romans made a lot of
sense, but I had to fudge (as I could see Cranfield fudging) the
negative statements about the Law in Galatians. For me then and now, if
I had to choose between Luther and Calvin I would always take Calvin,
whether on the Law or (for that matter) the Eucharist. But as I
struggled this way and that with the Greek text of Romans and Galatians,
it dawned on me, I think in 1976, that a different solution was
possible. In Romans 10.3 Paul, writing about his fellow Jews, declares
that they are ignorant of the righteousness of God, and are seeking to
establish 'their own righteousness'. The wider context, not least
9.30--33, deals with the respective positions of Jews and Gentiles
within God's purposes -- and with a lot more besides, of course, but not
least that. Supposing, I thought, Paul meant 'seeking to
establish *their own* righteousness', not in the sense of
a*moral* status based on the *performance* of Torah and the consequent
accumulation of a treasury of merit, but an *ethnic* status based on
the *possession* of Torah as the sign of automatic covenant membership?
I saw at once that this would make excellent sense of Romans 9 and 10,
and would enable the positive statements about the Law throughout Romans
to be given full weight while making it clear that this kind of use of
Torah, as an ethnic talisman, was an abuse. I sat up in bed that night
reading through Galatians and saw that at point after point this way of
looking at Paul would make much better sense of Galatians, too, than
either the standard post-Luther readings or the attempted Reformed ones.

The reason I'm telling you this is to show that I came to the position I
still hold (having found it over the years to be deeply rewarding
exegetically right across Paul; I regard as absolutely basic the need to
understand Paul in a way which does justice to all the letters, as well
as to the key passages in individual ones) -- that I came to this
position, not because I learned it from Sanders or Dunn, but because of
the struggle to think Paul's thoughts after him as a matter of obedience
to scripture. This brings me to the complexity of the so-called New
Perspective and of my relationship to it.

When Sanders's book was published in 1977, I devoured it with both
eagerness and puzzlement. Eagerness, because his exposition of
first-century Palestinian Judaism supported in all kinds of ways the
picture to which I had been coming through my reading of Paul (I was
not, then, well up in Judaism itself). Puzzlement, because when he came
to Paul Sanders seemed muddled and imprecise. This is partly, I now
realise, because he was not dealing with theology (and so seemed
confused about basic things like justification and salvation), but
rather with religion, and patterns of religion in particular. His
agenda, there and elsewhere, included a desire to make Christianity and
Judaism less antithetical; in other words, to take a large step away
from the anti-Judaism of much Pauline scholarship. I need hardly say
that I never embraced either Sanders's picture of Paul or the
relativistic agendas which seemed to be driving it. Indeed, for the next
decade much of what I wrote on Paul was in debate and disagreement with
Sanders, not least because his proposals lacked the exegetical clarity
and rootedness which I regarded and regard as indispensible. For me, the
question has always been 'But does this make sense of the text?', not
'But will this fit into some abstract scheme somewhere?'

Lots of those who joined the Sanders bandwaggon, not least in America,
did so because they shared his post-Holocaust re-evaluation of
Christian-Jewish relations, and the implicit relativism which that
engendered. I have spent considerable energy arguing against this
position, and explaining that Paul's critique of Israel is not based on,
or productive of, anti-Judaism as such, still less anti-semitism, but
involves a far more delicately balanced and nuanced theology which
cannot be reduced to such slogans.

Likewise, when Jimmy Dunn added his stones to the growing pile I found
myself in both agreement and disagreement with him. His proposal about
the meaning of 'works of the law' in Paul -- that they are not the moral
works through which one gains merit but the works through which the Jew
is defined over against the pagan -- I regard as exactly right. It has
proved itself again and again in the detailed exegesis; attempts to deny
it have in my view failed. But Dunn, like Sanders (and like some other
New Perspetive writers such as John Ziesler) has not, I think, got to
the heart of Paul. Again, much of my writing on Paul over the last
twenty years at least has been in at least implicit dialogue with him,
and I find his exposition of justification itself less than satisfying.
For one thing, he never understands what I take to be Paul's fundamental
covenant theology; for another, his typically protestant
anti-sacramentalism leads him to miss the point of Romans 6. I could go
on.

I say all this to make it clear that there are probably almost as many
'New Perspective' positions as there are writers espousing it -- and
that I disagree with most of them. Where I agree is as follows. It is
blindingly obvious when you read Romans and Galatians -- though you
would never have known this from any of the theologians we discussed
yesterday -- that virtually whenever Paul talks about justification he
does so in the context of a critique of Judaism and of the coming
together of Jew and Gentile in Christ. As an exegete determined to
listen to scripture rather than abstract my favourite bits from it I
cannot ignore this. The only notice that most mainstream theology has
taken of this context is to assume that the Jews were guilty of the kind
of works-righteousness of which theologians from Augustine to Calvin and
beyond have criticised their opponents; and, though Sanders's account of
Judaism needs a lot more nuancing, I regard the New Perspective's
challenge to this point as more or less established. What I miss
entirely in the Old Perspective, but find so powerfully in some modern
Pauline scholarship, is Paul's sense of an underlying narrative, the
story of God and Israel, God and Abraham, God and the covenant people,
and the way in which that story came to its climax, as he says, 'when
the time had fully come' with the coming of Jesus the Messiah. How all
this works out is still very controversial within the New Perspective.
But at these points, for good exegetical and historical reasons, I find
myself saying Here I Stand.

What has happened, then? Like America looking for a new scapegoat after
the collapse of the Cold War, and seizing on the Islamic world as the
obvious target, many conservative writers, having discovered themselves
in possession of the Pauline field after the liberals got tired of it,
have looked around for new enemies. Here is something called the New
Perspective; it seems to be denying some of the things we have normally
taught; very well, let us demonize it, lump its proponents together, and
nuke them from a great height. That has not made a pretty sight.
Speaking as one of those who is regularly thus carpet-bombed, what I
find frustrating is the refusal of the traditionalists to do three
things: first, to differentiate the quite separate types of New
Perspective; second, to engage in the actual exegetical debates upon
which the whole thing turns, instead of simply repeating a Lutheran or
similar line as though that settled matters; and third, to recognise
that some of us at least are brothers in Christ who have come to the
positions we hold not because of some liberal, modernist or relativist
agenda but as a result of prayerful and humble study of the text which
is and remains our sole authority. Of course, prayer and humility before
the text do not guarantee exegetical success. We all remain deeply
flawed at all levels. But that is precisely my point. If I am *simul
iustus et peccator*, the church, not least the church as the
scripture-reading community, must be *ecclesia catholica semper
reformanda*. Like Calvin, we must claim the right to stand critically
within a tradition. To deny either of these would be to take a large
step towards precisely the kind of triumphalism against which the
Reformers themselves would severely warn us. But if we are siblings in
Christ there are, I think, appropriate ways of addressing one another
and of speaking about one another, and I regret that these have not
always characterized the debate.

There is much more that I could say under both these initial headings,
but this must suffice for now. I turn to what I regard as the central
issues around which the debate ought to turn.

[Understanding Righteousness in Paul: The Central Issues]{.ul}

Let me, as a good Calvinist, offer you five points about Paul which I
regard as crucial in the present debates, justification itself being the
fifth. There are of course many other things vital to Paul, not least
Christology, about which I have written much; all of these need careful
integration into the picture, for which now is not the time. Ideally,
one would walk slowly round the piece of the Pauline jigsaw labelled
'justification', commenting on each other piece of the jigsaw and noting
how justification fits into it. Obvious examples, each of which is dear
to my heart and most of which I have written about elsewhere, are the
cross, the resurrection, the spirit, the Jewish law, union with Christ,
the sacraments, election, and love. Please do not think that because
there is no time to expound any of these I am forgetting or
marginalising them. And, again because of time, I simply state each
point in the barest outline, relying on my other works, not least my
recent Romans commentary, to back me up with details.

**1. The Gospel**

I begin where Romans begins -- with the gospel. My proposal is this.
When Paul refers to 'the gospel', he is not referring to a system of
salvation, though of course the gospel implies and contains this, nor
even to the good news that there now *is* a way of salvation open to
all, but rather to the proclamation that the crucified Jesus of Nazareth
has been raised from the dead and thereby demonstrated to be both
Israel's Messiah and the world's true Lord. 'The gospel' is not 'you can
be saved, and here's how'; the gospel, for Paul, is 'Jesus Christ is
Lord'.

This announcement draws together two things, in derivation and
confrontation. First, Paul is clearly echoing the language of Isaiah:
the message announced by the herald in Isaiah 40 and 52 has at last
arrived. Saying 'Jesus is Messiah and Lord' is thus a way of saying,
among other things, 'Israel's history has come to its climax'; or
'Isaiah's prophecy has come true at last'. This is powerfully reinforced
by Paul's insistence, exactly as in Isaiah, that this heraldic message
reveals God's righteousness, that is, God's covenant faithfulness, about
which more anon. Second, since the word 'gospel' was in public use to
designate the message that Caesar was the Lord of the whole world,
Paul's message could not escape being confrontative: Jesus, not Caesar,
is Lord, and at his name, not that of the Emperor, every knee shall bow.
This aspect lies at the heart of what I have called 'the fresh
perspective on Paul', the discovery of a subversive political dimension
not as an add-on to Paul's theology but as part of the inner meaning of
'gospel', 'righteousness', and so on.

For Paul, the announcement or proclamation of Jesus as Lord was itself
the 'word of God' which carried power. Putting together the various
things he says about the preaching of the gospel, the word, and the work
of the Spirit, we arrive at the following position: when Paul comes into
a town and declares that Jesus is Lord, no doubt explaining who Jesus
was, the fact and significance of his death and resurrection, and so on,
then the Spirit is at work, mysteriously, in the hearts and minds of the
listeners, so that, when some of them believe in Jesus, Paul knows that
this is not because of his eloquence or clever argument but because the
announcement of Jesus as Lord functions as (in later technical language)
the means of grace, the vehicle of the Spirit. And, since the gospel is
the heraldic proclamation of Jesus as Lord, it is not first and foremost
a suggestion that one might like to enjoy a new religious experience.
Nor is it even the take-it-or-leave-it offer of a way to salvation. It
is a royal summons to submission, to obedience, to allegiance; and the
form that this submission and obedient allegiance takes is of course
faith. That is what Paul means by 'the obedience of faith'. Faith
itself, defined conveniently by Paul as belief that Jesus is Lord and
that God raised him from the dead, is the work of the Spirit,
accomplished through the proclamation. 'No-one can say "Jesus is Lord"
except by the Holy Spirit.' But this already jumps ahead to my fourth
point, and before we get there we must take in the second and third.

**2. The Righteousness of God**

The second point concerns the phrase 'the righteousness of
God', *dikaiosune theou*. I became convinced many years ago, and time
and exegesis have confirmed this again and again, that Paul always uses
this phrase to denote, not the status which God's people have from him
or in his presence, but the righteousness of God himself. This is not to
say that there is no such thing as a righteous status held by believers.
There is. It is to deny that this is the referent of Paul's
phrase *dikaiosune theou*. Here a Pauline exegesis rooted in Paul's own
understanding of Jewish scripture and tradition must challenge the fuzzy
thinking that, listening to yesterday's papers, I discover characterised
most of the great, but basically Latin-speaking, theologians.

The main argument for taking *dikaiosune theou* to denote an aspect of
the character of God himself is the way in which Paul is summoning up a
massive biblical and intertestamental theme, found not least in Isaiah
40---55 which I have argued elsewhere is vital for him.
God's *dikaiosune*, his *tsedaqah*, is that aspect of his character
because of which, despite Israel's infidelity and consequent banishment,
God will remain true to the covenant with Abraham and rescue her none
the less. This 'righteousness' is of course a form of justice; God has
bound himself to the covenant, or perhaps we should say God's covenant
is binding upon him, and through this covenant he has promised not only
to save Israel but also, thereby, to renew creation itself. The final
flourish of Isaiah 55 is not to be forgotten, especially when we come to
Romans 8. Righteousness, please note, is not the same thing as
salvation; God's righteousness is the *reason why* he saves Israel.

But this covenant-fidelity, this covenant-justice, is not purely a
matter of salvific activity. As Daniel 9 makes clear, it is a matter of
God's severe justice upon covenant-breaking Israel, and only then a
matter of God's merciful rescue of penitent Israel. This is why the
gospel -- the announcement that Jesus Christ is Lord -- contains within
itself, as Paul insists in Romans 2.16, the message of future judgment
as well as the news of salvation. What God's righteousness never
becomes, in the Jewish background which Paul is so richly summing up, is
an attribute which is passed on to, reckoned to, or imputed to, his
people. Nor does Paul treat it in this way. What we find, rather, is
that Paul is constantly (especially in Romans, where all but one of the
occurrences of the phrase are found) dealing with the themes which from
Isaiah to 4 Ezra cluster together with the question of God's
righteousness: how is God to be faithful to Israel, to Abraham, to the
world? How will the covenant be fulfilled, and who will be discovered to
be God's covenant people when this happens?

This is precisely what Romans 9--11 is about, not as an appendix to the
letter but as its proper climax. And this is anticipated in several
earlier parts of the letter conveniently screened out by the great
tradition in its quest for a non-Jewish soteriology, not least the
second half of Romans 2, the first nine verses of Romans 3, and the fact
that in Romans 4 Paul is demonstrably arguing about God's faithfulness
to the Abrahamic covenant, not simply using Abraham as an example of
someone justified by faith.

Part of the tragedy of reformation exegesis, not least Lutheran
exegesis, is that this entire line of thought was screened out. Thus
even Käsemann, who sees clearly that *dikaiosune theou* must refer to
God's own righteousness, cannot allow that it has anything to do with
the covenant, but insists, against the evidence, that it has become a
technical term denoting 'God's salvation-creating power', with a cosmic
reach. He fails to notice a point I have come to regard as central and
crucial: that the covenant with Israel was always designed to be God's
means of saving and blessing the entire cosmos. You get the cosmic
reach, as in Genesis 12, as in Isaiah 40---55, as in the Psalms, as in
Romans 8, as in 1 Corinthians 15, not by bypassing the covenant but by
fulfilling it.

What then can we say about the status of 'righteous' which, in many
Pauline passages, is enjoyed by the people of God in Christ? For Paul,
there is a clear distinction. God's own righteousness is *dikaiosune
theou*. The status of 'righteous' which people enjoy as a result of
God's action in Christ and by the Spirit is, in Philippians 3.9, *he ek
theou dikaiosune*, the righteous status which is 'from God'. Ignoring
this distinction, and translating *dikaiosune theou* as 'a righteousness
from God' or something like that, makes nonsense of several passages,
most noticebly Romans 3.21--26 (as, for instance, in the appalling and
self-contradictory NIV!), where the great theme is the way in which God
has been faithful to the covenant, the astonishing way whereby all
alike, Jewish sinners and Gentile sinners, are welcomed, redeemed,
justified.

You can see this most clearly if you remember the context of the Jewish
lawcourt which forms the background for Paul's forensic use of
the *dikaiosune* theme. Despite some odd recent attempts to deny this,
if you want to understand forensic justification you must go to the
law-court and find how the metaphor works. In the Jewish lawcourt Paul
would have known, there is no Director of Public Prosecutions; there is
a judge, with a plaintiff and a defendant appearing before him. When the
case has been heard, the judge finds in favour of one party and against
the other. Once that has happened, the vindicated party possesses the
status 'righteous' -- not itself a moral statement, we note, but a
statement of how things stand in terms of the now completed lawsuit. As
someone said to me yesterday, it all depends what you mean by
'righteous'. But this status of righteousness has nothing to do with the
righteousness of the judge. For the judge to be righteous, it is
necessary that he try the case fairly, refuse bribes or other
favouritism, uphold the law, and take special note for the helpless, the
widows, and so on. When either the plaintiff or the defendant is
declared 'righteous' at the end of the case, there is no sense that in
either case the judge's *own* righteousness has been passed on to them,
by imputation, impartation, or any other process. What they have is a
status of 'righteous' which comes *from* the judge. Let me stress, in
particular, that when the judge finds in favour of one party or the
other, he quite literally makes the righteous; because 'righteous' at
this point is *not* a word denoting moral character, but only and
precisely the status that you have when the court has found in your
favour. If this had been kept in mind in earlier centuries a great deal
of heartache and puzzle might have been avoided.

What then about the 'imputed righteousness' about which we are to hear
an entire paper this afternoon? This is fine as it stands; God does
indeed 'reckon righteousness' to those who believe. But this is not, for
Paul, the righteousness either of God or of Christ, except in a very
specialised sense to which I shall return. There are only two passages
which can be invoked in favour of the imputed righteousness being that
of God or Christ. The first proves too much, and the second not enough.
The first is 1 Corinthians 1.30f., where Paul says that Christ has
become for us wisdom from God, and righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Wisdom is the main point he is making, and the other three
nouns come in as a way of saying 'and everything else as well'. 'Yea,
all I need, in thee to find, O Lamb of God, I come'; that line sums it
up well. I doubt if this will sustain the normal 'imputation' theology,
because it would seem to demand equal air time for the imputation of
wisdom, sanctification and redemption as well. The second passage is 2
Corinthians 5.21, which as I have argued elsewhere is not, as a matter
of good exegesis, a statement of soteriology but of apostolic vocation.
The entire passage is about the way in which Paul's new covenant
ministry, through the death and resurrection of Jesus, is in fact God's
appointed means for establishing and maintaining the church. 'So that we
might become God's righteousness in him' means that in Christ those who
are called to be apostolic preachers actually embody God's own covenant
faithfulness. I do not expect to convince you by this microcomsic
summary of the point, but I submit that it deserves careful exegetical
consideration, not dismissing with a wave of the hand and a reference to
Brother Martin.

Is there then no 'reckoning of righteousness' in, for instance, Romans
5.14--21? Yes, there is; but my case is that this is not God's own
righteousness, or Christ's own righteousness, that is reckoned to God's
redeemed people, but rather the fresh status of 'covenant member',
and/or 'justified sinner', which is accredited to those who are in
Christ, who have heard the gospel and responded with 'the obedience of
faith'. But this, too, is pushing towards my fifth point, and I must
proceed with the third.

**3. Final Judgment According to Works**

The third point is remarkably controversial, seeing how well founded it
is at several points in Paul. Indeed, listening to yesterday's papers,
it seems that there has been a massive conspiracy of silence on
something which was quite clear for Paul (as indeed for Jesus). Paul, in
company with mainstream second-Temple Judaism, affirms that God's final
judgment will be in accordance with the entirety of a life led -- in
accordance, in other words, with works. He says this clearly and
unambiguously in Romans 14.10--12 and 2 Corinthians 5.10. He affirms it
in that terrifying passage about church-builders in 1 Corinthians 3. But
the main passage in question is of course Romans 2.1--16.

This passage has often been read differently. We heard yesterday that
Augustine had problems with it (perhaps the only thing in common between
Augustine and E. P. Sanders). That is hardly surprising; here is the
first statement about justification in Romans, and lo and behold it
affirms justification according to works! The doers of the law, he says,
will be justified (2.13). Shock, horror; Paul cannot (so many have
thought) have really meant it. So the passage has been treated as a
hypothetical position which Paul then undermines by showing that nobody
can actually achieve it; or, by Sanders for instance, as a piece of
unassimilated Jewish preaching which Paul allows to stand even though it
conflicts with other things he says. But all such theories are
undermined by exegesis itself, not least by observing the many small but
significant threads that stitch Romans 2 into the fabric of the letter
as a whole. Paul means what he says. Granted, he redefines what 'doing
the law' really means; he does this in chapter 8, and again in chapter
10, with a codicil in chapter 13. But he makes the point most compactly
in Philippians 1.6: he who began a good work in you will bring it to
completion on the day of Christ Jesus. The 'works' in accordance with
which the Christian will be vindicated on the last day are not the
unaided works of the self-help moralist. Nor are they the performance of
the ethnically distinctive Jewish boundary-markers (sabbath, food-laws
and circumcision). They are the things which show, rather, that one is
in Christ; the things which are produced in one's life as a result of
the Spirit's indwelling and operation. In this way, Romans 8.1--17
provides the real answer to Romans 2.1--16. Why is there now 'no
condemnation'? Because, on the one hand, God has condemned sin in the
flesh of Christ (let no-one say, as some have done, that this theme is
absent in my work; it was and remains central in my thinking and my
spirituality); and, on the other hand, because the Spirit is at work to
do, within believers, what the Law could not do -- ultimately, to give
life, but a life that begins in the present with the putting to death of
the deeds of the body and the obedient submission to the leading of the
Spirit.

I am fascinated by the way in which some of those most conscious of
their reformation heritage shy away from Paul's clear statements about
future judgment according to works. It is not often enough remarked
upon, for instance, that in the Thessalonian letters, and in
Philippians, he looks ahead to the coming day of judgment and sees God's
favourable verdict not on the basis of the merits and death of Christ,
not because like Lord Hailsham he simply casts himself on the mercy of
the judge, but on the basis of his apostolic work. 'What is our hope and
joy and crown of boasting before our Lord Jesus Christ at his royal
appearing? Is it not you? For you are our glory and our joy.' (1 Thess.
3.19f.; cp. Phil. 2.16f.) I suspect that if you or I were to say such a
thing, we could expect a swift rebuke of 'nothing in my hand I bring,
simply to thy cross I cling'. The fact that Paul does not feel obliged
at every point to say this shows, I think, that he is not as concerned
as we are about the danger of speaking of the things he himself has done
-- though sometimes, to be sure, he adds a rider, which proves my point,
that it is not his own energy but that which God gives and inspires
within him (1 Cor. 15.10; Col. 1.29). But he is still clear that the
things he does in the present, by moral and physical effort, will count
to his credit on the last day, precisely because they are the effective
signs that the Spirit of the living Christ has been at work in him. We
are embarrassed about saying this kind of thing; Paul clearly is not.
What on earth can have happened to a *sola scriptura* theology that it
should find itself forced to screen out such emphatic, indeed
celebratory, statements?

The future verdict, when it is positive, can be denoted by the verb
'justify'. This carries its full forensic sense, rooted in the ancient
Jewish belief that the God of Israel, being the creator of the world and
also the God of justice, would finally put the world to rights, in other
words, that he would conduct a final Assize. On that day there will be
'glory, honour, immortality and the life of the age to come' for all who
do right (Romans 2.7); in other words (verse 13) they will be justified,
declared to be in the right. This ought to have highlighted long ago
something which I believe has played too little part in discussions of
Paul: justification by faith, to which I shall come in a moment, is
the *anticipation in the present* of the justification which will occur
in the future, and gains its meaning from that anticipation. What
Augustine lacked, what Luther and Calvin lacked, what Regensburg lacked
as a way of putting together the two things it tried to hold on to, was
Paul's eschatological perspective, filled out by the biblical fusion of
covenantal and forensic categories. But before we get there I want to
address a question which Paul seldom touches explicitly but about which
we can reconstruct his thought quite accurately. This is just as well
because it has played an important role in protestant discussions of
soteriology and lies, I think, at the heart of today's controversies
about justification.

**4. Ordo Salutis**

I refer to the question known as *ordo salutis*. I take this phrase to
refer to the lining up in chronological sequence of the events which
occur from the time when a human being is outside the community of God's
people, stuck in idolatry and consequent sin, through to the time when
this same erstwhile sinner is fully and finally saved. This question has
been closely bound up with that of justification, but I shall suggest in
this and the next section that when Paul uses the word and its cognates
he has in mind one step only within that sequence, and -- critically, as
you will see -- not the one that the word has been used to denote in
much Christian dogmatics. At this point I am implicitly in dialogue with
a general trend, at least since the sixteenth century, to make
'conversion' and 'justification' more or less coterminous; a trend which
has been sped on its way when 'conversion' is understood as 'the
establishment of a personal relationship with God', and justification
has been understood in a 'relational' sense with the meaning, not of
membership in the covenant as in the Old Testament, but of this personal
relationship between the believer and God.

I have already described how Paul understands the moment when the gospel
of Jesus as Lord is announced and people come to believe it and obey its
summons. Paul has a regular technical term for this moment, and that
technical term is neither 'justification' nor 'conversion' (though he
can use the latter from time to time): the word in question is 'call'.
'Consider your call', he says to the Corinthians; 'God called me by his
grace', he says of himself. (This is why, incidentally, Krister
Stendahl's suggestion that we should think of Paul's 'call' as opposed
to his 'conversion' misses the point. For Paul, the word 'call' denoted
not merely a vocation to a particular task but also, more fundamentally,
the effective call of the gospel, applied by the Spirit to the
individual heart and life and resulting in a turning away from idolatry
and sin and a lifelong turning to God in Christ in believing
allegiance.)

But if the 'call' is the central event, the point at which the sinner
turns to God, what comes before and after? Paul himself has given the
answer in Romans 8.29--30. Though he does not often discuss such things,
he here posits two steps prior to God's 'call' through the gospel: God's
foreknowledge, and God's marking-out-ahead-of-time, the mark in question
being the mark of the image of the Son. (I translate with a paraphrase
because of the problems associated with the word 'destiny' within the
word 'predestination'.) These serve to emphasize, of course, the
sovereignty of God in the call itself, while Paul never engages with the
questions we want to ask about how precisely these things work out. (The
closest he comes is of course Romans 9, which simply restates the
problem for us; the parallel statement in Ephesians 1.3--14 is a
celebration rather than an explanation.)

But what matters for our purposes even more is the question of what
comes *after* the 'call'. 'Those he called, he also justified'. In other
words, Paul uses 'justify' to denote something other than, and logically
subsequent to, what we have often thought of as the moment of
conversion, when someone who hasn't before believed the gospel is
gripped by the word and the Spirit and comes to believe it, to submit to
Jesus as the risen Lord. Here is the central point in the controversy
between what I say about Paul and what the tradition, not least the
protestant tradition, has said. The tradition has used 'justify' and its
cognates to denote conversion, or at least the initial moment of the
Christian life, and has then debated broader and narrower definitions of
what counts. My reading of Paul indicates that he does not use the word
like that; and my method, shared with the reformers, insists that I
prefer scripture itself to even the finest traditions of interpretation.
The fact that the Christian tradition has since at least Augustine used
the word 'justify' to mean 'become a Christian', whether broadly or
narrowly conceived, is neither here nor there. For Paul, 'justification'
is something that *follows on from* the 'call' through which a sinner is
summoned to turn from idols and serve the living God, to turn from sin
and follow Christ, to turn from death and believe in the God who raised
Jesus from the dead. This points on to my fifth and final point, to
which we shall come shortly.

But before that, we note that the final verb in Paul's sequence is not
'sanctified'. He would say that this has already happened to all
baptised believers (see 1 Corinthians 6.10f.). It is 'glorified'. Paul
regards it as a fixed point that those who belong to the Messiah by
faith and baptism already share his glorious life, his rule over the
world, and that this rule, this glory, will one day be manifest. There
is no time to develop this here, but I note, as a point which much
dogmatics has yet to come to terms with, the fact that both Paul and
John the Seer place great emphasis not just on being saved, not just on
being raised from the dead, but on sharing the glorious rule of Jesus
Christ as Lord over God's new world. What this role will consist of, who
or what will be in subjection under this rule, and so on, are questions
which have fallen off most people's radar screens. I suggest it's time
we got them back on.

I hope I have said enough in this short section to convince you of two
things. First, my understanding of how Paul supposed someone became a
Christian is, I think, basically orthodox and indeed reformed. God takes
the initiative, based on his foreknowledge; the preached word, through
which the Spirit is at work, is the effective agent; belief in the
gospel, that is, believing submission to Jesus as the risen Lord, is the
direct result. My central point is that *this isn't what Paul is
referring to when he speaks of 'justification'*. But the substance of
what reformed theology, unlike Paul, has referred to by means of that
word remains. Faith is not something someone does as a result of which
God decides to grant them a new status or privilege. Becoming a
Christian, in its initial moment, is not based on anything that a person
has acquired by birth or achieved by merit. Faith is itself the first
fruit of the Spirit's call. And those thus called, to return to
Philippians 1.6, can be sure that the one who began a good work in them
will complete it at the day of Christ.

Second, it is simply not true, as people have said again and again, that
I deny or downplay the place of the individual in favour of a corporate
ecclesiology. True, I have reacted against the rampant individualism of
western culture, and have tried to insist on a biblically rooted
corporate solidarity in the body of Christ as an antidote to it. But
this in no way reduces the importance of every person being confronted
with the powerful gospel, and the need for each one to be turned around
by it from idols to God, from sin to holiness, and from death to life.

**5. Justification**

What then is 'justification', if it is not conversion itself, not the
establishment of a 'relationship' between a person and God, but
something which is, at least logically, consequent upon it? This is
where confusion inevitably creeps in. I have argued again and again that
Paul uses *dikaioo* and its cognates to denote something other than
conversion itself; but several critics have not listened to this, but
have imagined that what I say about Paul's use of
the *dikaioo* word-group is my proposed description of his theology of
conversion; and they have then charged me with all kinds of interesting
heresies. To make this clear, let me use instead a near-synonym, and
speak here not of 'justification' but of 'vindication', recognising that
this is itself controversial.

My proposal has been, and still is, that Paul uses 'vindication'
language, i.e. the *dikaioo* word-group, when he is describing, not the
moment when, or the process by which, someone comes from idolatry, sin
and death to God, Christ and life, but rather the verdict which God
pronounces consequent upon that event. *dikaioo* is after all a
declarative word, declaring that something is the case, rather than a
word for making something happen or changing the way something is. (Nor
do we need to get round this, as many have done, by saying that when God
declares something to be the case he brings it into being; that's not
the point here.) And if we work backwards from the future vindication I
spoke of earlier I believe we can see what this declaration amounts to,
and why Paul insisted on it, especially in Romans and Galatians.

The language of vindication, the *dikaioo* language, is as we've seen
lawcourt language. Lawcourt imagery is appropriate because God is the
God of justice, who is bound to put the world to rights, has promised to
do so, and intends to keep his promises. But the means by which he will
do so, from Genesis 12 onwards, is through the covenant he has made with
Abraham; so that God's covenant faithfulness on the one hand, and God's
justice on the other, are not two quite different things, but closely
interlinked. Both are indicated, as we have seen, in the
phrase *dikaiosune theou*. When we talk of God's vindication of someone
we are talking about God's declaration, which appears as a double thing
to us but I suspect a single thing to Paul: the declaration (a) that
someone is in the right (their sins having been forgiven through the
death of Jesus) and (b) that this person is a member of the true
covenant family, the family God originally promised to Abraham and has
now created through Christ and the Spirit, the single family which
consists equally of believing Jews and believing Gentiles. I submit that
this way of lining things up draws together the various categories which
are otherwise left untidily around the place: forensic in Luther versus
adoption in Calvin, lawcourt versus incorporative in Schweitzer and
Sanders. Once you grasp Paul's underlying covenantal theology these
dichotomies are overcome. My first main point in this subsection is
therefore that these two things -- declaring sinners to be in the right,
with their sins forgiven, and declaring someone to be a member of the
single multi-ethnic covenant family -- go very closely together in
Paul's mind, and that to point out the importance of the latter
(belonging to the family) in passages like Romans 3 or Galatians 3 in no
way undermines the importance of the former (being one of those now
declared 'in the right' in God's lawcourt). The underlying point here is
crucial: the reason God established the covenant with Abraham, according
to scripture in general and Paul in particular, was to undo the sin of
Adam and its effects and thereby to complete the project of the good
creation itself. Thus God's declaration of forgiveness and his
declaration of covenant membership are not ultimately two different
things. I freely grant that some of those who have highlighted the
importance of the Jew-plus-Gentile point in Paul have used it as a way
of saying that Paul is therefore not after all interested in God's
dealing with sins and putting sinners in a right relation to himself.
But just because people draw false inferences one way, that is no reason
why we should draw them the other way. Let me take two obvious examples.

First, in Romans 3.21--31, by anyone's showing a vital and central
passage, Paul makes what most commentators in the reformation tradition
regard as a strange shift in verse 29, when he asks 'Or is God the God
of the Jews only?' (Notice how the NIV, for instance, omits the word
'Or'.) If he had been talking all along simply about individual sinners
being put right with God, we should indeed regard this as a sudden
intrusion of ethnic questions. But he hasn't. As chapter 4 will reveal,
when we allow it to play its full role, he has been talking about God's
faithfulness to the covenant with Abraham, and about God's creation of a
single family from both halves of sinful humanity. God's declaring that
sinners are now in a right relation to himself and God's declaring that
believing Jews and believing Gentiles belong in the same family are
inextricably bound up with one another.

The same point emerges in Galatians 2.11--21. Here, beyond cavil I
think, the point of vindication is not 'how someone becomes a Christian'
but the question of table-fellowship: with whom may I, indeed must I,
share table-fellowship? Peter's action in separating himself from
Christian Gentiles was not implying that they needed to perform moral
good works; it was implying that they needed to become physically
Jewish. Paul's argument against him was not to do with the mechanism of
how people come from being sinful idolaters to forgiven members of
Christ's people, but with the equality within the people of God of all
who believe the gospel, Jew and Gentile alike. That controversy, indeed,
dominates the entire letter in a way that, alas, I think Martin Luther
never saw (though specialists may correct me).

What then is this vindication, this *dikaiosis*? It is God's declaration
that a person is in the right; that is, (a) that their sins have been
forgiven, and (b) that they are part of the single covenant family
promised to Abraham. Notice that opening phrase: God's *declaration
that*. Not 'God's bringing it about that', but God's authoritative
declaration of what is in fact the case. This is the point, of course,
where some have accused me of semi-Pelagianism. That might be so if I
intended to denote, with the word 'justification', what the tradition
has denoted. But I don't. Paul, I believe, uses
vindication/justification to denote God's declaration about someone,
about (more specifically) the person who has been 'called' in the sense
described above. Vindication is not the same as call.

And we now discover that this declaration, this vindication, occurs
twice. It occurs in the future, as we have seen, on the basis of the
entire life a person has led in the power of the Spirit -- that is, it
occurs on the basis of 'works' in Paul's redefined sense. And, near the
heart of Paul's theology, it occurs in the present *as an anticipation
of that future verdict*, when someone, responding in believing obedience
to the 'call' of the gospel, believes that Jesus is Lord and that God
raised him from the dead. This is the point about justification by faith
-- to revert to the familiar terminology: it is the *anticipation in the
present* of the verdict which will be *reaffirmed in the future*.
Justification is not 'how someone becomes a Christian'. It is God's
declaration about the person who has just become a Christian. And, just
as the final declaration will consist, not of words so much as of an
event, namely, the resurrection of the person concerned into a glorious
body like that of the risen Jesus, so the present declaration consists,
not so much of words, though words there may be, but of an event, the
event in which one dies with the Messiah and rises to new life with him,
anticipating that final resurrection. In other words, baptism. I was
delighted yesterday to discover that not only Chrysostom and Augustine
but also Luther would here have agreed with me.

Traditional protestants may not like this much, but it is I submit what
Paul is saying. And I want you to notice right away, before I draw some
broader conclusions from all this, three things that follow. First,
Paul's doctrine of what is true of those who are in the Messiah does the
job, within his scheme of thought, that the traditional protestant
emphasis on the imputation of Christ's righteousness did within that
scheme. In other words, that which imputed righteousness was trying to
insist upon is, I think, fully taken care of in (for instance) Romans 6,
where Paul declares that what is true of the Messiah is true of all his
people. Jesus was vindicated by God as Messiah after his penal death; I
am in the Messiah; therefore I too have died and been raised. According
to Romans 6, when God looks at the baptised Christian he sees him or her
in Christ. But Paul does not say that he sees us clothed with the earned
merits of Christ. That would of course be the wrong meaning of
'righteous' or 'righteousness'. He sees us within the *vindication* of
Christ, that is, as having died with Christ and risen again with him. I
suspect that it was the mediaeval over-concentration on righteousness,
on *iustitia*, that caused the protestant reformers to push for imputed
righteousness to do the job they rightly saw was needed. But in my view
they have thereby distorted what Paul himself was saying.

Second, it emerges that justification, for Paul, is not (in Sanders's
terminology) how one 'gets in' to God's people, but about God's
declaration that someone *is* in. In other words, it is all about
assurance -- as we should have known from reading Romans. I've said it
before and this is the place to say it again: if we are thinking Paul's
thoughts after him, we are not justified by faith by believing in
justification by faith. We are justified by faith by believing in the
gospel itself -- in other words, that Jesus is Lord and that God raised
him from the dead. If, in addition, we believe in justification by faith
itself, we believe that, amazingly considering what God knows about us,
we are now and for ever part of the family to every member of which God
says what he said to Jesus at his baptism: you are my beloved child,
with you I am well pleased.

Third, it follows at once that justification is the
original *ecumenical* doctrine. The first time we meet justification,
that is, in Galatians 2, it is about people from different cultures and
traditions sharing table-fellowship on the basis of nothing other than
their shared faith in Jesus as Messiah and Lord. Once we relocate
justification, moving it from the discussion of how people become
Christians to the discussion of how we know that someone is a Christian,
we have a powerful incentive to work together across denominational
barriers. One of the sad ironies of the last four hundred years is that,
at least since 1541, we have allowed disputes about how people become
Christians -- that which we thought was denoted by the language of
justification -- to divide us, when the doctrine of justification
itself, urging us to unite across our cultural divides, went unheard.
Not that there are not large and important problems in ecumenical
relations. I am horrified at some of the recent Anglican/Roman
statements, for instance, and on things like the Papacy, purgatory, and
the cult of saints (especially Mary), I am as protestant as the next
person, for (I take it) good Pauline reasons. But justification by faith
tells me that if my Roman neighbour believes that Jesus is Lord and that
God raised him from the dead then he or she is a brother or sister,
however much I believe them muddled, even dangerously so, on other
matters.

[Conclusion]{.ul}

I have, I suspect, said enough to put the cat among the pigeons, but not
enough to get it back into its basket. That will have to come, if at
all, in question and answers. But let me conclude with four brief
propositions about the importance of taking at least this version of the
New Perspective seriously, and one flagrantly homiletic plea.

First, to restate the point of method. I remain committed to
understanding Paul in his own right and his own terms against all
traditions about him, including my own. I remain convinced that Luther
and Calvin would say Amen to that point of principle. And I believe, and
have argued in my various exegetical works, that this reading of Paul
makes far more sense of his letters, in whole and in their various
parts, and in their mutual relations, than all other readings known to
me. Part of that exegetical task is to relate Paul to the Jewish world
of his day, and this reading I believe does that far better than the
traditional one, though debates naturally remain about many aspects of
the Jewish context.

Second, this reading of Paul allows fully for the challenge to each
person to hear and believe the gospel and live by it, while at the same
time allowing fully also for three other contexts, each of which is
vitally important to Paul, to have their place. These three other
contexts are the cosmic, as in Romans 8; the ecclesiological, as in his
constant emphasis on the unity of Jew and Gentile in Christ; and the
political, as mentioned earlier. Many have tried to play these off
against each other; I believe they are instead mutually reinforcing. The
united multi-ethnic church is a sign of God's healing and remaking of
the cosmos and also thereby a sign to Caesar and his followers that his
attempted unification of the world is a blasphemous parody. This is part
of what Ephesians and Colossians are all about, though that is another
story. It is also, I believe, a point in urgent need of emphasis today.

Third, this new perspective reading of Paul enables us to understand,
crucially for some current debates in my church at least, why Paul is
very tolerant of differences on some points (particularly food, drink
and holy days) and completely intolerant on others (particularly sexual
ethics). The boundary lines he insists on blurring (in, for instance,
Romans 14 and 1 Corinthians 8) are precisely those between different
ethnic communities, particularly Jew and Gentile. The boundary lines he
draws the more firmly are those between the holy lifestyle required of
those who have died and been raised with the Messiah and the unholy
lifestyle of those who behave as if they had not, but were still living
'in the flesh'. This, too, is urgent today.

Fourth, I discover an irony in the anti-New Perspective reaction in
specifically Reformed circles. The New Perspective launched by Sanders
and taken up eagerly in many American contexts was always a reaction,
not to Reformed readings of Paul, but to Lutheran ones and the broader
protestantism and evangelicalism that went along for the Lutheran ride,
particularly in its negative assessment of Judaism and its Law. Had the
Reformed reading of Paul, with its positive role for Israel and the Law,
been in the ascendancy rather than the Lutheran one, the New Perspective
might not have been necessary, or not in that form. For myself, it may
surprise you to learn that I still think of myself as a Reformed
theologian, retaining what seems to me the substance of Reformed
theology while moving some of the labels around in obedience to
scripture -- itself, as I have suggested, a good Reformed sort of thing
to do.

I end with a plea. I have lived most of my life in and around
evangelical circles in which I have come to recognise a strange
phenomenon. It is commonly assumed that Luther and Calvin got Paul
right. But often when people think of Luther and Calvin they see them,
and hence Paul, through three subsequent lenses provided by western
culture. The Enlightenment highlighted the abstract truths of reason
over against the messy facts of history; many Protestants have put
Lessing and Luther together and still thought they were reading Paul.
The Romantic movement highlighted inner feeling over against outer,
physical reality; many have thence supposed that this was what Paul, and
Luther and Calvin, were really saying (hence the knee-jerk protestant
anti-sacramentalism). More recently, existentialism has insisted that
what matters is being true to my inner self, rather than being
conditioned by history, mine or anyone else's; many people, not only
Rudolf Bultmann, have read Paul and Luther in that light.

At a popular level, this mess and muddle shows up in a general sense
that anything inward, anything to do with strong religious emotion,
anything which downplays outward observance, must be striking a blow for
the Pauline gospel of justification by faith. This is as worrying as it
is absurd. All these movements are forms of dualism, where Paul believed
in the goodness and God-givenness of creation, and in its eventual
promised renewal. Together they reinforce that gnosticism which is a
poison at the heart of much contemporary culture, including soi-disant
Christian culture.

It is time to turn away from all this; to rub our eyes, and look clearly
at the path by which we and our culture have come. It is time to turn
back again, following the old *sola scriptura* principle, to the source
and origin of one of the great doctrines of the New Testament: that
when, through God's effective call (*sola gratia*) in the preaching of
the gospel of Jesus Christ (*solus Christus*), someone comes to believe
that he is the risen Messiah and Lord, God thereupon (*sola fide*)
declares in advance what he will declare on the last day when he raises
that person from the dead: this person is in the right, their sins have
been forgiven, they are part of the single, true, worldwide covenant
family promised to Abraham, the sign of the coming new creation and the
counter-sign to the boast of Caesar. Justification is ultimately about
justice, about God putting the world to rights, with his chosen and
called people as the advance guard of that new creation, charged with
being and bringing signs of hope, of restorative justice, to the world.
Let's put the justice back in justification; and, as we do so, remind
ourselves whose justice it is, and why. *Soli Deo Gloria*! Having thus
stolen Luther's slogans, I thought I might end with 'Here I stand'; but
let me rather say it in Paul's language. *hode hesteka; allo ou
dunamai*.
