---
title: Righteousness
type: document
---
Righteousness

(Originally published in *New Dictionary of Theology*.  David F. Wright,
Sinclair B. Ferguson, J.I. Packer (eds), 590-592.  IVP.  Reproduced by
permission of the author.)

Righteousness.  The basic meaning of 'righteousness' and its cognates in
the Bible derives from the Hebrew *sedeq*, which was usually translated
in the LXX as *dikaiosynē*. It thus denotes not so much the abstract
idea of justice or virtue, as right standing and consequent right
behaviour, within a community.  English translates this semantic field
with two different roots: 'right', 'righteous', and 'righteousness' and
'just', 'justice', 'justify' and 'justification'.  In Heb. and Gk.,
however, these ideas all belong together linguistically and
theologically.

In the OT (upon which the NT idea is based) two fields of thought give
specific shape to the idea:

1.  The lawcourt setting gives 'righteousness' the idea of the standing
    > of a person in relation to the court's decision.In the Hebrew
    > court there were no public prosecutors: all cases had to be
    > brought by a plaintiff against a defendant.  Righteousness is the
    > status which results, for either party, if the court finds in his
    > favour.  Since the standard of judgment is the covenant law of
    > God, 'righteousness' can acquire the sense of 'behaviour in
    > conformity with the covenant requirements', bringing about the
    > possibility that right covenant standing can be observed in
    > ordinary behaviour.  In addition, the judge, or king, must conform
    > to a different sense of righteousness: he must try cases fairly,
    > i.e. he must be true to the law and/or the covenant, must condemn
    > evil, show no partiality, and uphold the cause of the
    > defenceless.  This complex meaning explains the occasional
    > instances when the Septuagint uses *dikaiosynē* to translate
    > not *sedeq* and its cognates but other roots such
    > as *hesed* (grace, covenant mercy), *mišpāt* (judgment,
    > justice), *etc*.

2.  The covenantal setting merges with that of the lawcourt: this is due
    > partly to the fact that the law (Torah) is the covenant
    > charter.Though sometimes God himself is seen as Israel's adversary
    > at law, the more frequently encountered picture is of God as judge
    > or king, with Israel as either plaintiff (pleading her cause
    > against her enemies) or defendant (on trial for failure to keep
    > the covenant).  God's righteousness is then invoked as the reason
    > why he can be expected to deliver his people: he is committed by
    > covenant to do so.  When this is apparently called into question
    > (in the exile, and later in the Maccabean revolt and the fall of
    > Jerusalem in AD 70), the writers of these periods reply that God
    > is righteous in judging his sinful people; that he is righteous in
    > waiting before judging their enemies, granting time for
    > repentance; and that he will show himself righteous in restoring
    > the: fortunes of his people, in renewing the covenant (Dn. 9; Ezr.
    > 9; etc.).  The book of Job can be seen as a long lawcourt scene in
    > which Job pleads his righteousness, imagining that God is his
    > adversary, only to discover that God cannot be brought into court:
    > the first two chapters reveal Satan (see Devil) as the real
    > prosecutor, with Job's comforters as his unwitting assistants.

These two settings (lawcourt and covenant) combine to produce the
developed covenantal theology which underlay Judaism at the time of
Jesus.  To have 'righteousness' meant to belong to the covenant, the
boundary marker of which was the Torah, and the hope of which was that
God, in accordance with his own righteousness, would act in history to
'vindicate', to 'justify', his people (i.e. to show that they really
were his people) by saving them from their enemies.  These meanings are
reflected particularly in Matthew, where 'righteousness' is shorthand
both for the saving plan of God (Mt. 3:15) and for the covenantal
obligations of his people (5:20; 6:1), and Luke, which emphasizes the
'righteous' standing of many of the key actors in the drama (Lk. 1:6;
2:25; 23:50; Acts 10:22).  Jesus himself is sometimes called 'the
righteous one', in virtue of his being the one designated by God as his
true covenant partner (e.g. Acts 3:14; 7:52, 22:14, Jas. 5:6).  The
Jewish belief that God would judge the world justly is echoed repeatedly
in the NT, e.g. 2 Thes. 1:5-6; Rom. 2:1-16; Heb. 12:23.  But the fullest
development comes in Paul, particularly with his exposition in Romans of
the righteousness of God.

Paul saw that the Jewish problem of God's righteousness (if the creator
of the world is Israel's covenant God, why is Israel still oppressed?)
had been answered in a new and striking way in the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ.  The answer had, in fact, forced a
restatement of the question, demonstrating as it did the universal
sinfulness of Jews as well as pagans.  The gospel, Paul declares, proves
that God is in the right despite appearances: he has kept covenant with
Abraham, has dealt properly with sin, has acted and will act without
partiality, and upholds all those who cast themselves, helpless, on his
mercy (Rom. 1:16-17; 2:1-16; 3:21 -- 4:25).  God has, in other words,
shown 'righteousness' in the sense appropriate for the judge and the
Lord of the covenant.  He is thus able to anticipate the verdict of the
last day (Rom. 2:1-16) and to declare in the present (Rom. 3:21-26) that
all who believe the gospel are already within the covenant community
(see Justification).

The view that 'the righteousness of God' refers to a righteousness which
God gives to, bestows upon, or recognizes in human beings came initially
from Augustine, but gained its force (in terms of the development of
modern theology) from Luther's reaction against a *iustitia
distributiva*. The term *iustitia*, as found in the Latin Vulgate, had
indeed pulled the understanding of texts such as Rom. 1:17 in the
(false) direction of a merely 'distributive' justice, in which God
simply rewards virtue and punishes vice.  Luther's alternative, however
fruitful in opening new worlds of theology to him, was in some ways
equally misleading, for it directed attention away from the biblical
notion of God's covenant faithfulness and instead placed greater
emphasis upon the status of the human being.  In the period after
Luther, Protestant theology largely returned to the notion of the
distributive justice of God: because God is righteous, he must in fact
reward virtue and punish sin, and this satisfaction of divine justice
took place in Christ.

According to the NT, the people of God do indeed have 'righteousness'. 
This is not, strictly speaking, God's own righteousness (though cf. 2
Cor. 5:21), but that which is proper to the person in whose favour the
court has found; within the covenant context, it is the right standing
of a member of the people of God.  'Righteousness' thus comes to mean,
more or less, 'covenant membership', with all the overtones of
appropriate behaviour (e.g. Phil. 1:11).  The terminology plays a
central role in Paul's debate with those who sought to keep the covenant
community within the bounds of physical Judaism: they, Paul says, are
ignorant of God's righteousness (i.e. of what God is righteously
accomplishing, of how he is fulfilling his covenant) and are seeking to
establish a righteousness of their own (i.e. a covenant membership for
Jews alone), whereas in God's plan Christ offers covenant membership to
all who believe the gospel (Rom. 10:3-4).  (See further Paul.)

The central biblical discussions of righteousness thus principally
concern membership in the covenant and the behaviour appropriate to that
membership.  Since, however, these passages depend on a theology in
which God is creator and judge of all the earth, and in which God's
people are to reflect God's own character, it is not illegitimate to
extrapolate from them to the 'justice' which God desires, and designs,
for his world. The church is to be not only an example of God's intended
new humanity, but the means by which the eventual plan, including the
establishment of world-wide justice, is to be put into effect.  Lack of
emphasis here in older theological writing, due sometimes to
individualism and sometimes to a dualistic split between church and
world, has led to a reaction (e.g. in some liberation theology) in which
'justice' as an abstract virtue has been elevated in an unbiblical
manner (e.g. at the expense of mercy).  This should not prevent a
balanced orthodox view of world-wide justice from regaining, and
retaining, its place in the church's teaching and practice.
