---
title: Breaking Bread -- Part 1 -- The New Passover Supper
type: document
translationKey: Breaking Bread -- Part 1 -- The New Passover Supper
geometry: margin=2cm
geometry: a4paper
---

Luke 22:7-13 Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover
lamb had to be sacrificed. Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and
make preparations for us to eat the Passover." "Where do you want us to
prepare for it?" they asked. He replied, "As you enter the city, a man
carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him to the house that he
enters, and say to the owner of the house, 'The Teacher asks: Where is
the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?' He will
show you a large room upstairs, all furnished. Make preparations there."
They left and found things just as Jesus had told them. So they prepared
the Passover.

Jesus told Peter and John to prepare for the Passover meal and they
asked Him where it should be. His answer was elaborate and detailed.

It is clear from this that Jesus intended that the celebration should be
properly prepared and also that its location really mattered. Either
Jesus Himself had arranged the place or, as seems likely, the Holy
Spirit made the arrangements having given directions to both Jesus and
the owner of the upper room.

**Have we given the same prayerful consideration to the location and
preparation of breaking bread?** When we compare the gospel account to
the current usual practice of breaking bread in a church service, two
contrasts are immediately obvious: firstly the preparation involved in
sharing a piece of bread and a cup of wine is insignificant compared
with a meal, and secondly the location in a church service is entirely
different from in a family room. Jesus could easily have located the
meal in the temple court in view of its great significance and
connection with temple sacrifices. Or he could have located it in a
synagogue in nearby Bethel where he was known and loved. But Jesus
intended that it should be in a secular space, in an ordinary home.

We have got so used to \"breaking bread\" in a church service that it is
hard for us to think about this occasion as the disciple would have. We
get a much better idea if we think of celebrating Christmas. Like
Christmas, Passover was a major annual celebration. The meal was a
central and essential part. You could not begin to think of celebrating
it without a big carefully prepared meal. Neither would it occur to you
to have your Christmas meal in church, despite it being a celebration of
Jesus\' birth. Neither would you think of joining in with a dozen other
families to have a big joint affair. You would hopefully want to invite
one or two lonely people to join in with you, or you might want to do
something especially for lonely people. But you would want it to be as
\"authentic\" as possible -- a great meal with a family feel and lots of
conversation and maybe some games. Neither would you dream of asking a
priest to officiate over the celebration. Passover was not Christmas,
but I think it was a lot closer to Christmas than it is to \"breaking
bread\" in a church service.

It was therefore natural for the disciples to ask about its preparation
and location. They were not at home, so needed to find somewhere they
could celebrate. They found a \"man of peace\" to offer his home. He was
not someone the disciples knew, but he welcomed them. No doubt he and
his household helped the disciples cook the meal, prepare the room and
witnessed their celebration. It seems likely that he went on to become a
disciple.

**Luke 22:14-15 When the hour came, Jesus and his apostles reclined at
the table. And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer.\"**

To the disciples, this was just another Passover celebration, one of a
lifetime of such annual celebrations. But for Jesus this was special.
How long had Jesus \"eagerly desired to eat this Passover\" with them?
Since leaving Galilee on their way to the festival in Jerusalem?

\"As the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven, Jesus
resolutely set out for Jerusalem.\" (Luke 9:51)

Or was it since the very beginning of His ministry, when at the wedding
in Cana He said to Mary, \"My hour has not yet come\"? Or had Jesus been
looking forward to this meal since the original Passover back at the
beginning of Israel\'s history? Or perhaps since the Fall or the very
dawn of creation?

The point is that for Jesus this was not *a* Passover celebration but
*the* Passover celebration, to which all previous ones had been
pointing. Judgement has been lifted from God\'s people and would now and
forever pass over them as Jesus Himself becomes our righteousness. The
disciples had been celebrating Passover since childhood without ever
truly understanding it. **Is it possible that we too have been
celebrating Breaking Bread for years without ever truly understanding
it?**

We can only imagine what it must have been like for Jesus to celebrate
this meal with a bunch of people who had no idea of its eternal
significance. I can imagine Him wishing that Elijah and Moses, who he
shared with at the Transfiguration, could have been there. He must have
longed to talk about the big-picture of God\'s eternal purposes and the
true meaning of Passover and the huge significance of the New Covenant.
But instead the disciples kept bringing the focus of conversation back
to themselves -- who would betray Jesus, who was the greatest, who would
never deny Jesus\...

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. **(16)** **For I tell you, I will not
eat it again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God.**" After
taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among
you. For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God comes." And he took bread, gave thanks and
broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you;
do this in remembrance of me."

Jesus again emphasises how unique this occasion is by telling the
disciples that this meal and this drink (v17) would be His last
\"**until** **it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God\"**. He wanted
the disciples to understand that this was a turning point in history
that would usher in the Kingdom that they had spent the previous three
years announcing and demonstrating. He is surely also telling them that
the terrible events about to unfold are not the end, but the fulfilment
of the Passover they had been celebrating for years without properly
understanding it.

These words are key to understanding this meal. There are some things
which are fulfilled and finished with, but there are others that are
fulfilled and continue. The priesthood pointed to Jesus but has now been
finished with (Hebrews 7:11,18). The Law pointed to Jesus and is now
finished with (Hebrews 8:13). The temple pointed to Jesus and is
fulfilled and finished with (Hebrews 9:8 ). The Sabbath pointed to Jesus
and is now fulfilled and finished with (Colossians 2:16-17). But the
Passover meal is different. It is fulfilled in the cross but has a
continuing purpose. The Passover meal is not simply pointing to Jesus.
It was prophetic of a Kingdom meal, a meal with a purpose in the Kingdom
of God. Jesus told His disciples about this, but we have forgotten it.
We will come to this soon.

Jesus did not have to wait long before the Passover was fulfilled in His
death on the cross. One of His first acts after His resurrection was to
eat with his disciples -- something that Luke makes a point of
recording:

Acts 10:48 \"He was not seen by all the people, but by witnesses whom
God had already chosen---by us who ate and drank with him after he rose
from the dead.\"

The point of course is that the Passover is now fulfilled and the
Kingdom has come. We are forever delivered from the kingdom of darkness
into the Kingdom of Light. Up to this point the Passover had been both a
reminder of past deliverance and also a promise of future deliverance.
But that future deliverance had now come and there was no longer a need
to look back to the original Passover. This new Passover was not meant
to be a ceremonial remembrance of Jesus\' death, but a living
remembrance of Jesus\' life as the present King in His Kingdom. **Do we
treat the breaking of bread merely as a memorial or as fulfilling a
Kingdom purpose?**

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." **(17)** **After
taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among
you.** For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine
until the kingdom of God comes." And he took bread, gave thanks and
broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you;
do this in remembrance of me."

Jesus takes the bread and the cup and gives thanks. This is the
thanksgiving before the meal (saying grace as we might call it). He then
tells the disciples to divide it among themselves. I think this
instruction was intentional and important. He deliberately gave the
disciples responsibility to share the food out because it created an
opportunity for heart attitudes to be revealed -- for good or for bad.
He then used it as an opportunity for teaching them about servanthood
(vv24-30).

Later in the NT we see this working out amongst another group of
disciples:

1 Corinthians 11:17-22 In the following directives I have no praise for
you, for your meetings do more harm than good. In the first place, I
hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among
you, and to some extent I believe it. No doubt there have to be
differences among you to show which of you have God's approval. So then,
when you come together, it is not the Lord's Supper you eat, for when
you are eating, some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. As a
result, one person remains hungry and another gets drunk. Don't you have
homes to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the church of God by
humiliating those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I
praise you? Certainly not in this matter!

For various reasons the traditional churches stopped having a meal when
celebrating the Lord\'s supper. One of the reasons given is because Paul
writes:

> 1 Corinthians 14:40 \"But everything should be done in a fitting and
> orderly way.\"

A meal usually involves a certain degree of disorderliness, especially
compared to a liturgical service. By leaving the meal out, so that all
you have is the thanksgiving, you certainly have something more orderly.
But is this what Jesus wants? Do we really think that God is concerned
with orderliness in our services -- or is His concern the attitudes of
our hearts that give rise to disorderliness? Remember that Jesus\' own
Last Supper was a proper meal, with lively discussion and it also
resulted in a lively argument.

There is no suggestion that Jesus was embarrassed at the disorderliness
of His meal, or that Paul though it would be better to leave the meal
out. For both Jesus and Paul, their response to the bad attitudes that
emerged from the meal was to address the heart attitudes. The meal is an
important aspect of discipleship -- it is an opportunity to show
interest and concern for one another, to talk about Jesus, to serve one
another. It is also an opportunity for selfishness and bad attitudes to
be seen so that the deeper needs of the community can be identified and
addressed.

**Have we made our breaking of bread so orderly that it has lost its
ability to reveal our heart attitudes towards one another?**

I suggest therefore that both the meal, and the instruction that the
members should share it amongst themselves, are important aspects of
what Jesus instructed us to do together. Leaving these aspects out
removes the opportunity for discipleship.

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." After taking the
cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. **(18)
For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until
the kingdom of God comes."** And he took bread, gave thanks and broke
it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you; do this
in remembrance of me."

We have already seen that Jesus ate and drank with the disciples and
many others after the resurrection, so we can take those meals as proof
that Jesus considered that His Kingdom had indeed come.

Luke 22:15-19 And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer. For I tell you, I will not eat it
again until it finds fulfilment in the kingdom of God." After taking the
cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you. For I
tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the
kingdom of God comes." **(19) And he took bread, gave thanks and broke
it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you; do this
in remembrance of me."**

Jesus now introduces a completely new idea into the Passover meal. Jesus
points to the ***bread*** they are sharing and eating, not the Passover
lamb! Jesus was the Passover Lamb (as John the Baptist recognised --
John 1:29 "Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world!\") so we would expect Jesus to say \"This *lamb* is My Body
broken for you\" but instead He points to the bread. He calls the bread
\"My body\" but He doesn\'t say it is *broken* for them, but *given* for
them. This is clearly a reference to what He had previously said about
being the Bread of Life that the Father gave:

> John 6:32-59 \"My Father gives you the true bread from heaven \... I
> am the bread of life \... This bread is my flesh, which I will give
> for the life of the world \... my flesh is real food and my blood is
> real drink \... The words I have spoken to you---they are full of the
> Spirit and life.\"

Here Jesus tells us that He Himself is the food and drink we need to
sustain us in life. Jesus clearly means His teaching and His example and
not just His sacrificial death -- \"\[My\] words \... are full of the
Spirit and life\". So we conclude that in the Last Supper Jesus offered
the bread as a symbol and reminder of His life and teachings, not just
His death. It is remarkable that Jesus never even mentioned the Passover
Lamb. It is also remarkable that Jesus never taught about what or how
His death would accomplish our salvation.

The fact that Jesus diverts attention towards the bread suggests to me
that He intended the focus of the meal to be a remembrance of His life
and teachings, rather than dwelling on His death.

A further indication of this is His use of the phrase \"do this in
remembrance of me.\" It is inconceivable that Jesus was concerned that
we might forget that He died for us unless we regularly broke-bread in
order to remember it! Think about this. Do you think we need to break
bread to stop us forgetting that Jesus died? The Salvation Army don\'t
celebrate the Last Supper but they have not forgotten the Cross. The
idea that we need to celebrate the Last Supper lest we forget the Cross
is bizarre and ridiculous. That is not what remembrance of the dead is
for. People do not remember the dead to remember their death, but to
remember their life.

The purpose of celebrating the last supper is not to remind us
***that*** Jesus died for us, but ***why*** He died. His toast at the
end of the meal (Luke 22:20) tells us what Jesus wanted us to remember
-- the New Covenant. In other words the celebration is about His life in
us now, not His death for us 2000 years ago.

\"Do this in remembrance of me\" is very likely a reference to the
Jewish practice of sharing bread and wine in remembrance of the life of
someone who has died:

> Jeremiah 16:4,7(NKJV) \"they shall not be lamented nor shall they be
> buried \... Nor shall men break bread in mourning for them, to comfort
> them for the dead; nor shall men give them the cup of consolation to
> drink for their father or their mother.\"

Jeremiah is writing about a terrible judgement to come where so many
will die that they will be left unburied and un-mourned for. But what we
learn is that the custom was to *break bread and share a cup of
consolation* when someone died (the NIV is not so clear). Jesus adds
this custom to the Passover celebration at the Last Supper because this
meal is not just the remembrance of deliverance, but the remembrance of
an extraordinary *life*. Whenever people remember their dead, they
remember their lives, not the details of their death. That is surely
what Jesus intends for us. We are to feed on His word and His example
and on His living presence with us, remembering that in His death He has
not left us as orphans, but He is forever with us (Matt 28:20) and is
coming again in Glory.

The practice of focussing on the death of Jesus when we celebrate the
Last Supper is, I believe, missing the point. It is His Life that feeds
us, not His death. It seems to me that the focus of conversation when we
celebrate the Last Supper should be the words and life of Jesus and His
present effect on our lives. This is made even clearer in the next verse
in Luke\'s account:

> Luke 22:20 In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying,
> "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for
> you.\"

After they had shared both the meal and their conversation, Jesus raised
the cup in a similar way that we would propose a toast after a special
meal. "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for
you.\" This is the first clear reference in the meal to His death.

But notice that Jesus does not say "This cup is *My blood* which is
poured out for you\" but "This cup is the *new covenant* in my blood,
which is poured out for you.\" Jesus is drawing our attention *to* the
New Covenant, and not dwelling on His death.

The Law of Moses was written on stone tablets, but Jesus\' New Covenant
was to be written on our hearts by the Holy Spirit:

> Jeremiah 31:31-34 "Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I
> will make a new covenant \... I will put My law in their minds, and
> write it on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be
> My people \... they all shall know Me, from the least of them to the
> greatest of them, says the Lord. For I will forgive their iniquity,
> and their sin I will remember no more."
>
> Luke 22:20 "This cup is the **new covenant** in my blood, which is
> poured out **for you**.\"

This is what Jesus was \"toasting\" -- the fact that ***we*** can now
all know the Lord ourselves through the Spirit. Jesus says to celebrate
that He gave Himself ***for us***. Jesus is saying, \"Don\'t you ever
forget what I have accomplished for you. Don\'t go back to the Law.
Don\'t go back to slavery. Don\'t forget that I am with you always and
alive forevermore. Don\'t forget that you are seated with me in the
heavenly places to rule with me in My Kingdom. That is why after the
meal Jesus said to them:

> Luke 22:29-30 \"I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred
> one on me, so that **you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom
> and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel**.\"

This is the point and purpose of celebrating the Last Supper \"in
remembrance of me\". And this, I believe is the purpose that the meal
\"fulfils\" in His Kingdom. The meal is not meant to be simply a
remembrance of Jesus\' death, but a remembrance that He lives and reigns
in His Kingdom, and that we are meant to sit with Him and reign with Him
in His kingdom. Jesus said to His disciples, and He says to you and I,
\"I confer on you a kingdom. And now I invite you to \"eat and drink at
my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.\" **How have you responded to Jesus\' invitation?**

Let us review what we have learnt and consider our response.

1.  What differences are there between how you have been celebrating the
    Breaking of Bread and what Jesus did and told us to do?

2.  What location do you think Jesus wants you to use to celebrate the
    Breaking of Bread?

3.  What do you think Jesus wants you to prepare?

4.  Who does Jesus want you to invite?

5.  Do you think Jesus is as eager to share the celebration with you as
    He was with His disciples? What is He eager about?

6.  Do you think you may have something to learn from Jesus about the
    significance of this celebration? What do *you* think about when you
    break bread? What do you think *Jesus* is focusing on?

7.  Why do you think that all other aspects of the Law have passed away,
    except the celebration of the Passover meal?

8.  What purpose do you think the celebration fulfils in His Kingdom?

9.  Why do you think Jesus was so eager to eat and drink with his
    followers after his resurrection?

10. What role in discipleship do you think is played by the act of
    sharing out food?

11. What kind or orderliness do you think Jesus is looking for in the
    celebration?

12. The Passover meal and sacrifice was a lamb. Why do you think Jesus
    made bread the symbol of the celebration instead of the lamb?

13. Jesus said to celebrate the Breaking of Bread in remembrance of Him.
    What do you think He wants you to remember?

14. Looking over Luke\'s account of the Passover meal, what mood do you
    detect in Jesus? To what degree is it solemn and mournful and
    focussed on His imminent death, and to what degree is it joyful and
    victorious and looking beyond the cross? What mood do you think
    Jesus wants to see in you when you celebrate the Breaking of Bread?

15. Meditate on Luke 22:29-30. Is this a passage you have given
    attention to before? What is Jesus saying to you? Do you feel
    invited to this table? What does Jesus want you to do at that table?
    How does Jesus want you to share in ruling in His Kingdom?

16. Do you think that sitting with Jesus and ruling with Him in His
    Kingdom might be the fulfilment of the Passover meal that Jesus want
    you to celebrate?

17. How will you change the way you celebrate the Breaking of Bread to
    align more closely with what Jesus wants you to do?
