---
title: Vision and reason for a leadership team
type: document
---
Our common goal is to see the Kingdom of God established more and more,
both in the church members and in the wider community.

John has been very releasing in his encouragement for anyone who has any
ideas or desires for ministry or mission to let them get on with it,
with his blessing.

You find John\'s confidence in you as a reader to be very affirming, but
you don't have all the skills and confidence necessary to implement
everything you want to do. Also, you don't want to just get on with it
on your own. You want to feel part of a team with a shared vision of
what we believe God is calling us to.

For instance, we are trying to make AAW really work for the families and
be a place of mission. This is a big challenge for us and it needs a
team effort -- especially in Hayfield. It needs involvement and
prayerful support from a range of people -- some with vision, some with
practical skills, and some with relationships amongst young families.
And it needs John\'s involvement as the Vicar.

John is telling everyone to go and do mission, but few people apart from
John have the personal skills, opportunities and confidence to get on
with it.

There are many people who have vision, ideas and desires for mission,
but few have all the qualities of vision, confidence, personal skills,
time and energy to pursue an idea from inception through to a
fully-fledged ministry. People need encouragement and support in
mission. (You feel unheard and unsupported when trying to share your
ideas or things you feel need attention.)

This is what a leadership team could and should be doing. Supporting and
encouraging each other, and discerning those ideas or initiatives that
others bring which we should really get behind and help them to happen.
This is how we love one another and build up the body to minister in the
power of the Spirit.

Can we agree a vision for this leadership team, and sketch out the sorts
of things we can do to serve the Body of Christ in supporting mission?

Who de we think Jesus wants us to include in forming a team with a range
of gifting?
