---
title: A&S Wedding Sermon
type: document
---
Andy & Sue\'s Marriage

Read Genesis 2vv4-9,15-25

Marriage is not a result of tradition or customs, but is something that
proceeds from the heart of God. If Andy and Sue can really believe this
with all their hearts, then they will have a good solid foundation upon
which to build their marriage. They will be able to face anything and
everything that is thrown at them as a couple, and which may threaten to
shake their relationship. If those of us who have been married for
longer than half an hour can gain faith and strength from this
knowledge, then our marriages also will be strengthened.

I hope during the course of the next hour to be able to share something
of my own exitement and faith in the knowledge of God\'s commitment to
the success and fruitfulness of marriage. Marriage is God\'s idea, and
all the love, grace, power and authority of God is poised to help and
strengthen the marriage of anyone and everyone who is prepared to
cooperate with Him by receiving God\'s help. This is not simply because
God likes people to be happy, but because marriage is a wonderful and
bold declaration of God\'s eternal purpose to unite His Son with the
Church which is the Bride of Christ. But let\'s go back a stage.

Our starting point is to see that the account of man\'s creation is a
mirror of man\'s salvation. Gen 2vv18-23 God looked for a bride for
Christ among all of mankind but found none worthy. So He sent His own
Son Jesus Christ into this world of sin and strife and rebellion against
God, and He caused Jesus to be put into the sleep of death upon the
cross, and had His side pierced by a spear so that from the cleansing
flow of His blood should come men and women who have been forgiven and
redeemed, and who will be presented to Him as a radiant church, the
bride of Christ, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy
and blameless.

Gen 2v24 Jesus left His Father in heaven and left behind the glory of
His home, that He might come to earth to cleave to needy men and women
and become united with them. As we leave our old ways and life behind
and turn to Christ, so we are united with Him and become one spirit with
Him. Such a bond is permanent, not only for this life but for eternity.
Jesus prayed that His followers should all be one together and also one
with Christ, just as Christ is one with the Father. It is this unity,
Jesus says, that will cause the world to believe that God sent Jesus to
be our saviour.

And so, in the same way that God the Father wanted to give His Son a
bride, God saw that it was not good for a man to dwell alone. No animal
in all creation is sufficient to meet the need a man has for
companionship and for help in carrying out his God given responsibility
of ruling over and caring for God\'s creation. God put Adam to sleep and
out of his side made a bride suitable for him, a woman who was bone of
his bone and flesh of his flesh.

As Andy and Sue come together in marriage, they are joined bone of their
bone, flesh of their flesh. To enter into this they must leave their
parents, their background and their independence, they must cleave to
one another and they must begin to become one flesh, emotionally,
physically and spiritually. Within the marriage bond, God has ordained
that there should be nakedness with no shame. Not simply physically, but
a transparency, an openness of heart and mind with an honesty and
givenness, one to the other, which is born out of mutual trust and love.

Yet it seems to me that just as mortal, fallen men are the most unlikely
candidates for a bride for the pure and holy Lamb of God, in the same
way, a woman is an unlikely candidate for a bride for a man. But for the
grace of God, men and women are incompatible. They think differently,
their emotions work differently, and their sexual responses are
different. For an individual who has lived for years with a private
foundation for his or her security, to make themself vulnerable, not to
another of the same sex who thinks in a similar way, but to someone who
can never really think and feel as they do, is a risky and scary thing
to do. Yet a relationship can only be

as strong as it is deep, and this depth inevitably means
misunderstanding and hurt as well as deep joy and strength and security.
A marriage can only really work where there is sacrifice and love and
forgiveness, and this too reflects the sacrifice, love and forgiveness
which Christ gives freely to His bride.

The marriage covenant is a reflection of the covenant between God and
His people. God will never break His covenant with us; it is made by God
and established in heaven. Marriage is a very special covenant because
likewise it is established in heaven as we make the marriage covenant on
earth. Because it has been accepted by God as a valid covenant, which He
Himself is committed to and shares in, then it cannot be broken by man.
There is no provision for repentance from marriage. God does not say
that if you think you have made the wrong choice you can retract the
covenant. If God has made no provision for retracting the marriage
covenant, He most certainly is committed to providing all the grace,
love, forgiveness and healing that is necessary, not just to stop a
marriage collapsing, but to make it flourish, against any odds.

Marriage, then, is one of the most significant and profound of acts, in
which every couple, whether they know it or not, proclaim to all the
principalities and powers that God will unite His Son with His people,
the church. Satan is opposed to marriage because he is opposed to order
and well being, but even more because it is a constant reminder of the
salvation which Christ has brought to men and women, and to the ultimate
triumph of the Church over the powers of darkness.

D:\\CHRCHTCH\\FOUNDATN\\A&SMARR.DOC ver. 1.0

Andy and Sue have this assurance that as they come together this day
they do so in the will and purpose of God, and with all the resources of
God, who has called them firstly to union with His Son and then to union
with each other. They know that their marriage has been made in heaven
and is therefore permanent. It cannot be undone by men. They are aware
that this day marks the beginning of a new life together, that will need
to be built by the grace of God, the word of Christ and the power of the
Holy Spirit. They understand that in joining together in marriage, they
do so with purpose; that they might come to a place of ruling with
Christ in prayer that they would not otherwise of had, that they might
find their place of corporate service in the church and in the world,
and that they might simply enjoy being with one another, and find
fulfillment and satisfaction by dwelling together as man and wife.
