---
title: Daron's Wedding
type: document
---
**Eph 1:3 Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in
Christ. For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be
holy and blameless in his sight. In love he predestined us for adoption
to sonship through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and
will--- to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given
us in the One he loves. In him we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God's grace that
he lavished on us.**

**Preach**

All I ever heard on the radio when I was growing up was Radio Three
(except that it was the wireless in those days, and the third program).
So I've never taken any interest in pop music. But recently I was very
struck by the lyrics of a popular song that I hadn't really noticed
before. Admittedly, the song was popular 2000 years ago! Anyway, these
are the lyrics:

"Awake, you sleepers, Arise from the dead, And Christ will give you
light."

That set me thinking about the experience we have every day of
transitioning from dreamy-sleep to wakefulness, and I wondered what it
was that the song-writer was getting at.

I am often awake for some time before the alarm goes off and I enjoy the
gradual transition from dreams to wakefulness. When I am properly asleep
and dreaming, the most bizarre and irrational things happen and yet make
total sense. A person can be two different people at the same time. I
can do impossible things which seem perfectly normal. When I am fully
awake, I realise how ridiculous the things in my dreams were. But
there's an interesting phase in between where I am awake, but not
properly alert. In that phase, ordinary physical reality reigns, but I
can still have a very unrealistic perspective on things. I might imagine
a project I am working on having an unrealistic significance, or a
planned conversation leading to a spectacular outcome. Then, as I get up
and revisit my waking thoughts, I realise that my expectations were far
too high.

It was presumably this transition from the false realities of dreams and
semi-wakefulness to the reality of alert consciousness that inspired
this lyric:

"Awake, you sleepers, Arise from the dead, And Christ will give you
light."

The writer saw a parallel between waking from sleep and getting to know
Jesus Christ. And I think this a very appropriate parallel. There is a
new reality that we discover as we get to know Jesus which makes our
former life seem like sleep in comparison.

The thing about sleep, is that we do not realise we are asleep. I often
have dreams in which I am convinced I have woken from sleep. In my dream
I realise I was dreaming and convince myself that I am now awake, when
in fact I am still fully asleep. Waking from that sort of dream is
always a shock. On waking I discover another reality beyond what I
thought was already wakeful-reality.

The slightly worrying thing about all this is that we only discover we
were asleep, when we wake up. And when, within a dream, we think we have
woken from a dream we only discover that were still in fact asleep when
we wake up from that dream. And I only discover that my waking
deliberations are unrealistic when I get up and start to get oxygen into
my brain.

So this begs a question: how can I ever be sure I am not still partially
asleep...? Could I "wake up" and discover a new reality that I had
previously been completely unaware of? Could I, even now, be living with
a distorted view of reality, unable to see the unreasonableness of my
conclusions?

Actually, Yes! That seems like a pretty good description of our lives
doesn't it? Don't we all, to varying degrees, suffer from distorted
realities. None of us are fully awake. We all sometimes come to the
wrong conclusions and make false assumptions. We don't know what other
people are really thinking and if we are honest, we don't even properly
know or understand ourselves. We are, to some degree, asleep, and the
reality we need to know is beyond our reach whilst we continue to sleep.

The song writer all those years ago clearly had an experience which was
like waking from sleep. And his lyric makes an intriguing and appealing
promise:

"Awake, you sleepers, Arise from the dead, And Christ will give you
light."

If there really is a light available to us, which brings a reality akin
to waking from sleep, is that not good news? Of course it is. In fact,
that is what the age of enlightenment was all about. The age of
scientific discovery providing rational explanations for everything that
previous generations attributed to God. Liberation from the deceit and
slavery of religion.

Except that the enlightenment didn't set us free from ourselves. More
people are trying to escape the pain of their lives through drugs and
alcohol than ever before and at the same time there is a greater
spiritual hunger in modern developed societies than perhaps in any
previous age. So if the scientific enlightenment has not delivered the
ultimate light, what is the light that can wake us from our sleep?

What is this promise of light? And what has all this got to do with this
wedding?

Well, weddings take place in a dream-like unreality. We all hope that
every day will be as happy and full of joyful expectation as this day,
but we all know they won't. You will certainly wake from this sleep. And
we all wake up each day to our own wakeful reality. But what light will
you interpret your waking reality in? The light of your own life
experiences will not be enough. But if it's all we have, it's what we
have to make do with. And this is the point: our own light is not all we
have! God offers us His light; the Light of Christ.

The lyric urges us to "Wake up!" "Rise from the dead!" and receive the
"Light of Christ". I guess there are some here who have encountered the
Light of Christ, and others who have not. Encountering Jesus is very
much like waking from sleep. Suddenly you see things differently. There
is a new reality that is far more concrete that you had previously
known. Old ideas now seem foolish and hard to believe. Things that
previously seemed ridiculous now become clear. Meeting Jesus is like
having a light turned on inside you.

But it is also somewhat like being half-awake. Realities have definitely
changed and old ways of seeing things become virtually impossible. But
we can still get our perspective wrong. We can still make wrong
assumptions and take poor decisions. We need to realise that we are
still only partially awake. We need to get to know Jesus better and
better so that we can become more fully awake. And so this is my message
to you. It is not "Wake up and smell the coffee!" -- "Don't you realise
how tough this is going to be...".

No, my message is "Wake up and make Jesus the source of your Light" If
you do that; if you keep coming back to Him, living in His light and
getting to know Him better, you will have a God-Blessed marriage. Waking
up to Jesus is not a single event -- it is a many layered ongoing
experience of waking up to discover more and more of the depth and the
breadth of His love. So how does this song continue? What verses to this
song have been written in your life? Perhaps the best thing that we can
do for one another is to share what we have discovered of His love for
us. That is how we sing this song:

"Awake, you sleepers, Arise from the dead, And Christ will give you
light."

So this is my contribution to all who are here today, and especially to
Daron and Lizelle: this is one of the verses from my song:

I have caught a glimpse of God's incredible goodness and rightness.
Jesus has woken me to see how utterly perfect He is. His will for me is
the very best there can ever be. His judgements about what I do, what I
think, what I wish for are the most enlightened and meaningful and
joyful and fulfilling there can be. Neither I nor anyone else can
improve on God's desires and intentions for me. There are no better
outcomes than the ones God has in mind for me. The very best course of
action I can ever take is to discover and fulfil His wishes for me. That
motivates me to seek His will and His wisdom and His perspective on my
life. I'm not always very good or consistent in following His will
because I'm not fully awake to His light, but the more I see of Jesus,
the more I realise that there is no other light that is more appealing
and desirable.

I finish with a verse from this song written by the man who quoted this
lyric. He was a friend of Jesus, called Paul. This is one his verses:

> "Have you seen what I've seen? God is such an amazing Father! He has
> freely provided for each of us every spiritual blessing in the person
> of His Son Jesus. He has literally given Jesus to us as a gift so that
> we become one person with Christ. Jesus is our righteousness: and
> because Jesus is God's Son we also are God's children -- loved as
> completely as the Father loves Jesus. It gives God tremendous pleasure
> to love us because it gives Him tremendous pleasure to love Jesus. He
> delights in us because He delights in Jesus. And because of His
> unbounded love He simply pours out His grace and forgiveness and mercy
> on us. He simply loves to do that! His love for Jesus envelops us
> completely. And this amazing love is freely given to all those who
> trust in Jesus' death on the cross on their behalf. In that act, God
> gave Himself in love to free us from ourselves; to wake us from our
> sleep; to bring His light into our lives." (Ephesians 1:3-8, my
> paraphrase)

Daron and Lizelle, His love for you is the light that will sustain your
love for each other.

"Awake, you sleepers, Arise from the dead, And Christ will give you
light."
