---
title: Union with Christ
type: document
---
# Union with Christ -- Notes from Rankin Wilbourne

See also my \"In Christ\" in /Salvation/

## Introduction

P24: Jn 17:3 Now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.

1 Jn 1:3 We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard, so that you
also may have fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father
and with his Son, Jesus Christ.

Eph 1:3-4 Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in
Christ. For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be
holy and blameless in his sight.

2 Pet 1:3 His divine power has given us everything we need for a godly
life through our knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and
goodness. 4Through these he has given us his very great and precious
promises, so that through them you may participate in the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.

## 1: Living in the Gap

p34: We struggle with the high promises of scripture, such as \"greater
things than these will you do\" and \"Whoever drinks of this water will
never thirst again\". If only!

We may be more used to thinking of Christ as our Saviour outside of me
than the one who dwells within me.

p37: John Murray: \"Nothing is more central or more basic than union
with Christ\... it is the central truth of the whole doctrine of
salvation.\"

p38: If you have ever asked \"Isn\'t there more to it than this?\" The
answer is \"Yes. Union with Christ is the \"more to it.\"

p40: Phil 3:12 Not that I have already obtained all this, or have
already arrived at my goal, but I press on to take hold of that for
which Christ Jesus took hold of me.

## 2: Union with Christ - What is it?

p42: Col 3:3 For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in
God.

p43: Paul constantly talks about us being \"in Christ\". It is the
essence of Christian proclamation and experience.

We share in His life, obedience, death, resurrection and ascension:

p45: Gal 2:20 I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live,
but Christ lives in me. The life I now live in the body, I live by faith
in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

Rom 6:4 We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in
order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of
the Father, we too may live a new life.

Col 3:1 Since, then, you have been raised with Christ, set your hearts
on things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.

Eph 2:6 And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the
heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,

p48: Our sin, shame, weakness - everything are covered in Christ. We
rest in Him.

1 Jn 4:18 There is no fear in love. But perfect love drives out fear,
because fear has to do with punishment. The one who fears is not made
perfect in love.

P49: Jn 14:16-17 And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another
advocate to help you and be with you forever---the Spirit of truth. The
world cannot accept him, because it neither sees him nor knows him. But
you know him, for he lives with you and will be in you.

P50: Col 1:27 To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles
the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of
glory.

Jn 14:12 Very truly I tell you, whoever believes in me will do the works
I have been doing, and they will do even greater things than these,
because I am going to the Father.

p51: 2 Cor 13:5 Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith;
test yourselves. Do you not realize that Christ Jesus is in
you---unless, of course, you fail the test?

P52: Eph 1:18-19 I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened
in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the
riches of his glorious inheritance in his holy people, and his
incomparably great power for us who believe.

P54: Union with Christ is not just an idea to be understood, but a new
reality to be lived, through faith.

p57: Jn17:26 I have made you known to them, and will continue to make
you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that
I myself may be in them."

P58: Eph 4:13-15 until we all reach unity in the faith and in the
knowled 36:26ge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the
whole measure of the fullness of Christ. Then we will no longer be
infants, tossed back and forth by the waves, and blown here and there by
every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of people in
their deceitful scheming. Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will
grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head,
that is, Christ.

## 3: Why we need it

p60: Rom 12:2 Do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be
transformed by the renewing of your mind.

Ezek 36:26 I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you; I
will remove from you your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh.

1 Cor 2:16 But we have the mind of Christ.

Eph 4:24 put on the new self, created to be like God in true
righteousness and holiness.

2 Cor 5:16 So from now on we regard no one from a worldly point of view.
Though we once regarded Christ in this way, we do so no longer.

Phil 2:15 that you may become blameless and pure, \"children of God
without fault in a warped and crooked generation.\" Then you will shine
among them like stars in the sky.

All these verses suggest great transformation in our character. Yet the
reality is that we rarely see such wonderful transformation and most of
us feel stuck and unable to change.

Both grace and obedience are required.

P64: Every temptation challenges our belief that the Lord intends only
good for us. If we believed that we would never choose sin. Only those
who believe God is always full of love and goodness towards us can
choose obedience in the face of temptation. This grace changes our
perspective.

P65: But knowledge of that grace, on its own, does not change us:

Jer 6:14 They dress the wound of my people as though it were not
serious. \'Peace, peace,\' they say, when there is no peace.

Grace without obedience is an inadequate dressing for the wound of sin.

Jn 14:15 \"If you love me, keep my commands.

Jn 15:14 You are my friends if you do what I command.

Matt 7:21 \"Not everyone who says to me, \'Lord, Lord,\' will enter the
kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father who
is in heaven.

P67: Using grace as an excuse not to be obedient is utter folly and is
contrary to Jesus and the apostles.

P71: Jesus exemplifies radical grace and radical obedience. We need
both.

P72: Both justification and sanctification come from our union with
Christ.

1 Cor 1:30 It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has
become for us wisdom from God\--that is, our righteousness, holiness and
redemption.

P73: Jesus provides grace to cover our sin and power to obey his
commands.

Matt 6:33 But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all
these things will be given to you as well.

Phil 3:12 Not that I have already obtained all this, or have already
arrived at my goal, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ
Jesus took hold of me.

In Jesus we can be honest about our failures because of His grace, and
hopeful of change because of His power in us.

P75: Addiction to sin occurs when we seek to salve our pain with
anything other than Christ. When we reach for something other than Jesus
when our hearts are troubled, that something will steal life from us --
with our permission!

P76: When we feel defeated and accused and full of shame we must
remember that Christ is my righteousness and we can boldly approach the
Father in confidence. There is no other way to overcome sin.

P77: But we must also remember that Christ is in me to break the power
of sin. We can choose to obey: \"That is not who I am any more\".

1 Jn 4:4 You, dear children, are from God and have overcome them,
because the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the
world.

## 4: Union with Christ in the Bible

P87: Paul frequently talks about us being \"in Christ\". It is not just
a nice phrase, it changes everything about us:

2 Cor 5:17 Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, the new creation has come:
The old has gone, the new is here!

P88: Union with Christ is a closer union than any that can be imagined:

1 Cor 12:27 Now you are the body of Christ, and each of you is a member
of it.

1 Cor 3:16 Do you not know that you yourselves are God's temple, and
that God's Spirit dwells in you?

Eph 4:24 and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true
righteousness and holiness.

Eph 5:31-32 Married to Christ

Rom 8:39 neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation,
will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

P89: Abide is John\'s term for union with Christ: Jn 15:4-5 Remain in
Me, and I will remain in you. Just as no branch can bear fruit by itself
unless it remains in the vine, neither can you bear fruit unless you
remain in Me. I am the vine and you are the branches. The one who
remains in Me, and I in him, will bear much fruit. For apart from Me you
can do nothing.

P90: Jn 10:10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I have
come that they may have life, and have it to the full.

For Matthew, Mark and Luke, union with Christ is expressed as the
Kingdom of God. For instance the sermon on the mount describes the new
Kingdom life that union with Christ makes possible.

P92: Two most common complains about reading the bible are \"I don\'t
get anything out of it!\" and \"I don\'t understand it\".

Union with Christ give us the expectation that Jesus will speak to us
through His word and His spirit will help us to understand.

P94: Jn 15:9-11 "Just as the Father has loved Me, I have also loved you;
abide in My love. 10"If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My
love; just as I have kept My Father's commandments and abide in His
love. 11"These things I have spoken to you so that My joy may be in you,
and that your joy may be made full.

## 5: The Historic Tradition

P104: Luther: Christ and the soul become one flesh as in marriage.
Everything they have they hold in common, the good as well as the evil.
The believing soul can boast of and glory in whatever Christ has as
though it were his own.

P105: Calvin: We do not therefore contemplate him outside ourselves from
afar in order that his righteousness may be imputed to us but because we
put on Christ and are engrafted into his body -- in short, because He
designs to make us one with Him.

## 6: Whatever happened to union with Christ?

P116: Union with Christ might be the most important doctrine you have
never heard of!

Union with Christ can come across as obscure, or too heavenly minded to
be any earthly use.

P120: Our culture feeds our self-centredness, encouraging us to enthrone
ourselves as the sovereign of our lives. Pride is now embraced and
cherished as essential to human flourishing: embrace yourself, express
yourself, promote yourself.

P121: Union with Christ tells us that the most important part of our
identity comes from Christ, not ourself. Therefore we need a posture of
dependence, vulnerability, waiting and trust.

A married couple must learn to replace \"I\" with \"we\" as their
primary frame of reference. The same applies to our union with Christ.

P124: We like easy soudbites and clear ideas.

P125: Our desire for clarity can end up narrowing our view of the gospel
to the point where we end up at its centre.

P126: Col 1:16 For in him all things were created: things in heaven and
on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or
authorities; all things have been created through him and for him.

Jn 17:21 May they also be in us so that the world may believe that you
have sent me.

Jn 14:21,23 "He who has My commandments and keeps them is the one who
loves Me; and he who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will
love him and will disclose Myself to him\... If anyone loves Me, he will
keep My word; and My Father will love him, and We will come to him and
make Our abode with him.

P129: Union with Christ opens the door to a world larger and more
exciting, more mysterious and more dangerous, than you ever imagined.
Your imagination must be captured by a new story so you can keep
pressing onward and upward toward this new world, even as you walk with
both feet on the ground.
