---
type: document
translationKey: John's Seven Signs (4-5)
title: John's Seven Signs (4-5)
---
**^23 ^**Other boats, which were from Tiberias, came to shore near the
place where the crowd had eaten the bread after the Lord had given
thanks. **^24 ^**When the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his
disciples, they got into those boats and went to Capernaum, looking for
him.

**^25 ^**When the people found Jesus on the other side of the lake, they
said to him, "Teacher, when did you get here?"

*(Good News Translation)*\
**Seven Miraculous Signs of Jesus**

Read one story every day for 1 week.

1.  What does this story say to you about people?

2.  What does this story say to you about Jesus?

3.  What does this story say about you?

4.  Who needs to hear this story?

# Fourth Sign: John 6:1-14 Jesus feeds five thousand

After this, Jesus went across Lake Galilee (or, Lake Tiberias, as it is
also called). **^2 ^**A large crowd followed him, because they had seen
his miracles of healing the sick. **^3 ^**Jesus went up a hill and sat
down with his disciples. **^4 ^**The time for the Passover Festival was
near. **^5 ^**Jesus looked around and saw that a large crowd was coming
to him, so he asked Philip, "Where can we buy enough food to feed all
these people?" (**^6 ^**He said this to test Philip; actually he already
knew what he would do.)

**^7 ^**Philip answered, "For everyone to have even a little, it would
take more than two hundred silver coins to buy enough bread."

**^8 ^**Another one of his disciples, Andrew, who was Simon Peter\'s
brother, said, **^9 ^**"There is a boy here who has five loaves of
barley bread and two fish. But they will certainly not be enough for all
these people."

**^10 ^**"Make the people sit down," Jesus told them. (There was a lot
of grass there.) So all the people sat down; there were about five
thousand men. **^11 ^**Jesus took the bread, gave thanks to God, and
distributed it to the people who were sitting there. He did the same
with the fish, and they all had as much as they wanted. **^12 ^**When
they were all full, he said to his disciples, "Gather the pieces left
over; let us not waste a bit." **^13 ^**So they gathered them all and
filled twelve baskets with the pieces left over from the five barley
loaves which the people had eaten.

**^14 ^**Seeing this miracle that Jesus had performed, the people there
said, "Surely this is the Prophet who was to come into the world!"

#  Fifth Sign: John 6:15-25 Jesus walks on the water

**^15 ^**Jesus knew that they were about to come and seize him in order
to make him king by force; so he went off again to the hills by himself.

**^16 ^**When evening came, Jesus\' disciples went down to the
lake, **^17 ^**got into a boat, and went back across the lake toward
Capernaum. Night came on, and Jesus still had not come to
them. **^18 ^**By then a strong wind was blowing and stirring up the
water. **^19 ^**The disciples had rowed about three or four miles when
they saw Jesus walking on the water, coming near the boat, and they were
terrified.**^20 ^**"Don\'t be afraid," Jesus told them, "it is
I!" **^21 ^**Then they willingly took him into the boat, and immediately
the boat reached land at the place they were heading for.

**^22 ^**Next day the crowd which had stayed on the other side of the
lake realized that there had been only one boat there. They knew that
Jesus had not gone in it with his disciples, but that they had left
without him. 
