---
title: How_to_become_a_Christian
type: document
---
***How***

***to become a***

***Christian***

###### Stephen Dolley

**\
Contents**

Part 1 -- Why doesn't God stop the trouble in the world? 1

So what is the Christian message? 1

Part 2 -- What is Salvation? 2

Salvation in four parts 2

Election (which happens before we become a Christian) 2

Justification (which happens when we become a Christian) 2

Sanctification (which happens whilst we grow as a Christian) 3

Glorification (which happens after we die as a Christian) 3

Part 3 -- How do I become a Christian? 4

Repentance in three parts 4

Conviction 4

Confession 6

Changed behaviour -- the evidence of repentance 8

Faith 9

Receiving the Holy Spirit 10

Baptism in the Holy Spirit 11

Baptism 13

# 

# Part 1 -- Why doesn't God stop the trouble in the world?

If God is so powerful and loving, why doesn't He do something about the
innocent who suffer for the guilty, the global injustice and the
collapse of standards of right or wrong?

But what is it that God has to stop? It's people! It's hatred, violence,
lust, selfishness, dishonesty and a whole host of other things in
people. So the question is "are you prepared to let God stop these
things in you?" The issue is essentially a personal one. What about
*your* selfishness, *your* jealousy, *your* greed? If you will not let
God change you, then you have the answer to "Why doesn't God stop the
trouble?"

One thing is certain -- that God will stop it all one day; and if we
refuse to let God into our lives to forgive us and change us then
inevitably we will be judged and found guilty. If God appears to be
inactive now, it is because He is dealing with people in *mercy* instead
of judgement. He is giving you and me the chance to change.

## So what is the Christian message?

The most famous expression of the Christian message is Jesus' own words
recorded in **John 3:16** "For God so loved the world that he gave his
one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have
eternal life."

This clearly needs a little explanation:

God, our maker, wants to restore our relationship with Him, which we
have broken by choosing to go our own way. In going our own way we end
up doing all kinds of wrong. God sent Jesus to warn us that our wrong
doing would lead, when we die, to a terrible punishment from God, which
He called Hell. Jesus came to save us from this punishment.

God loves us so much that He sent His Son Jesus to take the punishment
that we deserve. Jesus' death on the cross was not the failure of His
mission that it seemed; it was in fact the fulfilment of His mission:
the self-sacrifice of God the Son taking the punishment for all our
wrongs upon Himself. Since our penalty has been paid, God is able to
forgive us and restore our relationship with Him.

God has acted to save us from Hell, but to benefit from His provision we
have to make our response. We must acknowledge our guilt, ask God for
forgiveness and commit ourselves to living His way instead of ours. In
choosing God's way we can enjoy a new relationship with Him which will
go on forever, even after we die.

The rest of this booklet explores and explains these things further so
that a person wanting to be restored to God might truly find Him.

# 

# Part 2 -- What is Salvation?

You have probably heard the expression "born again Christian" but what
does it mean? Jesus used the expression 'born again' to describe what it
is like to become a Christian:

> "No one can see the kingdom of God unless he is born again." (**John
> 3:3**)

This expression was used by Jews to describe someone who converted to
Judaism[^1] . A Gentile who was circumcised and baptised and vowed to be
subject to the Law of Moses was considered to be a new person. All of
their previous identity, including any sins and even any financial debts
were forgotten. The old person had died and the convert was born again
as a Jew. Jesus used this same language to speak of those who follow Him
in **John 3:1-12**. To become a true Christian is to be born again, to
be forgiven all past sin and have a new start. But salvation is more
than a new start and it involves more than a simple decision. This study
is designed to help you understand both what is involved in salvation
and how you can fully enter into it.

## Salvation in four parts

The bible describes four distinct parts of salvation. They are known as
election, justification, sanctification and glorification (see **Romans
8:30**). These are not words in common usage and so need some
explanation. A Christian continually grows in both understanding and
experience of salvation and only a basic grasp of these ideas is
required for someone wanting to become a Christian.

### Election (which happens before we become a Christian)

Most people who become Christians recognise that they had not been
seeking God as much as God had been pursuing them! C. S. Lewis tells of
a non-Christian friend who wrote to him, worried because he found that
most of his friends were Christians and that he was becoming unsure of
his committed atheist stand. Lewis wrote back saying that it sounded as
if the Holy Spirit was after him and that he doubted if he would get
away. This is election. It is God taking the initiative to reveal
himself to people who thought that they were not interested. Jesus said
that "No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him."
(**John 6:44**)

### Justification (which happens when we become a Christian)

Having got our attention and convinced us of our need for salvation, God
invites us to turn to Him and accept the death of Jesus as God's payment
for our sin. Accepting Jesus means we must reject our attempts at
self-righteousness and say "I am a sinner worthy of God's wrath but
Jesus paid the penalty for me so that I can go free." Justification
means that God looks at us and says "There is a sinner who was on the
road to hell, but he/she has accepted My payment for his/her sin so that
I am now able to love them freely, even though they are still far from
perfect." (See **Romans 5:1**) Some people use the phrase "it's
just-as-if-I'd never sinned" to remind them what 'justified' means.

The essential fact of our justification is that Jesus' death on the
cross justifies us and not our efforts to be good. We are 'born again'
when we are justified. Jesus said that in order to enter the kingdom of
God (be born again), one must be born of water (baptism) and Spirit
(receiving the Holy Spirit) (**John 3:5**). It is not simply a matter of
what we believe, or of praying a particular prayer, it is a process
involving God's work and our response resulting in a new life -- a
justified life.

### Sanctification (which happens whilst we grow as a Christian)

We do not become Christians by being good, but we cannot grow as
Christians by staying bad. One of the things that we discover as we grow
in the faith is that God does not want to take away our enjoyment of
life, rather, He wants to save us from those things which harm us.
Sanctification is the process of breaking the pattern of independence
from God so that we become more like Christ. It is a work of the Holy
Spirit in our lives and is a wonderfully liberating experience (See
**Philippians 1:6**). It is mostly a gradual thing, though there are
often periods of rapid growth. We can co-operate with God in this or
oppose Him.

### Glorification (which happens after we die as a Christian)

The climax of the Christian faith is what happens after we die. It is
not just 'pie in the sky' or harp strumming. We are presented to Jesus
as part of His 'bride' and receive all the glory that you could imagine
would be given to the bride of the King of the universe! We do not know
all the detail concerning this, but we know enough to provide great hope
and motivation in this life (See **1 Peter 1:3-6**). You will learn much
more about our glorification as you grow in faith.

# Part 3 -- How do I become a Christian?

The Christian life is established upon the 'foundation of *repentance*
from dead works and of *faith* toward God, of the doctrine of
*baptisms*, of *laying on of hands* (receiving the Holy Spirit), of
*resurrection* of the dead, and of eternal *judgement* (**Hebrews
6:1-2**).

The first four parts of this foundation -- repentance, faith, baptism
and receiving the Holy -- are the essential acts or experiences required
to become a Christian. Resurrection and eternal judgement are important
teachings which are intended to lead us to conviction of our
independence from God and to repentance.

## Repentance in three parts

Repentance refers to a change of heart producing a change of direction.
When God reveals to us that an attitude or act comes from a proud
independence from God, is harmful, and we have a deep desire to change
to become more like Christ, then we are experiencing repentance. It is
not something that happens only once but it is an ongoing experience of
God's work in our lives. Repentance involves conviction, confession and
changed behaviour.

Before explaining these three aspects of repentance consider this
illustration:

You may remember the Chinoble nuclear power station disaster. The
surrounding area was badly contaminated with radioactive particles
rendering it unsuitable for habitation. Suppose a family living there
had their granny living with them who loved her garden and could not be
persuaded to leave. The local authority had distributed warning leaflets
explaining the invisible peril and its inevitable result of terminal
cancer and the urgent need for people to move out of the area. They
provided alternative accommodation for the displaced people and
transport etc. But granny cannot see or feel the radiation and thinks
its just a government ploy to get them off land that they want to
redevelop. The family tries desperately to convince her but she will not
be convinced of her peril. They move away to safety leaving granny with
her garden.

After a few weeks all her flowers have gone spotty, all the birds have
died and granny slowly realises that her continual stomach upset is
getting worse rather than better. She recognises the reality of the
radiation and the truth of all the warnings and so is *convicted* of her
hardness of heart in refusing the pleadings of her family. She
*confesses* to them that she is now ready to heed their warnings. She
packs her bags and moves away. She is convicted, confesses her change of
heart and changes her behaviour.

### Conviction

Conviction is being convinced of something. God wants to convince us of
our guilt before Him and our need for salvation. Yet the purpose of
conviction is not to make us feel like convicts but to show us God's
perspective on our lives, so that we can see our need and turn to God
for help. God's aim is not to leave us feeling guilty but to turn us
from our sin and remove our guilt and shame (see **2 Corinthians
7:9-10**).

Most people will readily accept that their lives are not perfect and
even that they have made a mess of them, but many have no recognition of
their guilt before God. They cannot see what their lives have to do with
God.

It is not so difficult to see that we could benefit from some help from
God to live better lives. There may be a sudden dawning upon us that the
way we have lived our lives has caused great harm to ourselves or
others. We may feel regret or remorse for things we have done. It is
often the unpleasant consequences of sin or weaknesses in our character
that we regret and which may cause us to look to God for a remedy. We
may recognise our need for help to sort out our lives and turn to God to
obtain that help.

All this is good to recognise, but it is basically man-centred. It does
not get to the heart of the problem which is that our greatest and most
serious sin has been against God Himself. True repentance recognises, as
the Psalmist did, that "Against You God, You only, have I sinned, and
done what is evil in Your sight" (**Psalm 51:4**) -- this is conviction.
It is God Himself that should take centre stage in repentance, not us.
The gospel is not *primarily* concerned with putting our lives back
together, but with putting our relationship with God back together.

Repentance requires an understanding of the true nature of sin. We tend
to think of sin in terms of acts that are ultimately harmful to
ourselves or others, especially where they are harmful to loving and
open relationships. Thus, for instance, I sin if I lie to you. But this
is not God's definition of sin. God defines sin as our living in
independence from Him. Even if we do wonderful good, if it is done in
independence from God, we commit sin. It is not the *good deeds* that
are sinful, but our *independence*.

God created Adam and Eve for relationship with Him. Satan tempted them
with a promise that eating the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil would enable them to "be like God" so that they would no
longer be dependant upon Him (**Genesis 3:5**). This is the issue at the
heart of repentance. Our sin is in living our lives without depending
upon God for guidance and strength and in so doing, preferring our
fallen wisdom above His boundless love. In our ignorance and blindness
we accuse God of being uncaring or incompetent when in fact He is our
maker and the one person in all creation who loves us with unfaltering
passion and care. Thus, it is primarily against Him that we sin whilst
we make a mess of our lives through doing it our own way.

Because true repentance is focussed on our sin against God, whom we
cannot see, it requires revelation. Revelation of this perspective on
our sin is the purpose of conviction. It is a work of the Holy Spirit
which we should earnestly ask Him to do in our hearts. It is also a
process that starts around the time we are born-again and should
continue throughout our walk with God.

Conviction of the true nature of our sin is thus a precursor to
repentance. Conviction that makes true repentance possible is evidenced
by three signs[^2] :

1.  Awareness of a wrong relationship with God: not just with one's
    neighbour or one's own conscience, but with one's Maker; the God on
    whom one depends for existence every moment. It is the awareness of
    being in a broken relationship with God that spells rejection and
    wrath and which, whatever the cost, must be restored.

2.  Awareness of personal guilt and responsibility for specific sins
    from which one needs to turn.

3.  Awareness of personal sinfulness; of having a corrupt nature from
    which one needs deliverance.

**Psalm 51** is a psalm of conviction and repentance and may help to
elicit or explain conviction.

### Confession

Being born again as a Christian is the beginning of a new life, not just
a new experience or interest in our life. This new life comes about
through our death to our old life. Baptism (see below) is our public
witness to the fact that through faith in Jesus, we have identified
ourselves with Him in His death upon the cross and also with His
resurrection. We have died to our old way of life and have received new
spiritual life by receiving the Holy Spirit. If, through the conviction
of the Holy Spirit, we recognise that we have lived in rebellion towards
God then we will want to turn away from our past sinful attitudes and
behaviour as much as we are able. Confession of our sin helps us to do
this.

The apostle Paul talks about us being slaves to sin in our past life
(**Romans 6:16-23**). Jesus breaks the power of sin and allows us to
walk free from these "yokes of bondage". Paul urges us not to get
entangled with them again (**Galatians 5:1**). If we do carry these
yokes into our new life with Christ, it is never too late to deal with
them, but surely it is better to start our new life free from the yokes
that have bound us -- and then make sure we don't pick them up again!

Confession helps us to start our new life as unburdened as possible. The
purpose is not simply to get guilt off our chest, but sin out of our
lives. Confession of sin is the acknowledgement of our guilt with the
firm intention of changing. Confession of specific sins is necessary so
as to avoid vague generalities which leave the heart unchanged: "If we
confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness" (**1 John 1:9**). This may be with
someone else present or on our own before God and is best verbalised
rather than just thought. Confession of our sin should not leave us
feeling exposed, but wonderfully clean. For someone becoming a
Christian, there are probably four specific areas of confession to be
considered.

#### Confessing self-righteousness (pride)

Elements of self-righteousness are:

-   **Accusing God** of injustice or unfaithfulness or lack of love.
    This places us in the position of judge over God which is
    unbelievably arrogant, but very common, even normal! (See **Romans
    9:20-21**)

-   **Unbelief**. This is not simply a lack of faith. It is a wilful
    disregard of the facts and evidence of Jesus' life in favour of
    disbelief for the purpose of avoiding conviction of sin or personal
    responsibility. God *commands* belief (**1 John 3:23**) and condemns
    unbelief (**Mark 16:14,** **Hebrews 3:12**). Unbelief is ultimately
    an issue of the heart, not the head; that is, it is usually a moral
    rather than an intellectual problem.

-   **Excusing ourselves**, thinking that we are not too bad. This is
    self deception, keeping us from calling upon God for salvation and
    preventing us from putting our trust in Jesus for our justification.
    Many people are afraid of admitting their sin because they are
    afraid of condemnation, but, in fact, it is the very act of
    justifying ourselves that makes condemnation such a threat.

    **Isaiah 64:6** But we are all like an unclean thing, and all our
    righteousness is like filthy rags; we all fade as a leaf, and our
    iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. (See also
    **Philippians 3:8-9**)

    Self righteousness stops us from receiving the forgiveness and peace
    of Christ. It needs careful attention and you may need a Christian
    to help you recognise and repent from it.

#### Confessing ungodly behaviour {#confessing-ungodly-behaviour .list-paragraph}

Contrary to common belief, Christianity is not for 'good' people, but
for bad people who know they need help. You may find that you are caught
up in all sorts of situations that involve ungodly behaviour; perhaps
being under pressure to fiddle forms at work or claiming unlawful
benefits or involvement in an ungodly relationship. You do not have to
put all this right before you can become a Christian, but you do need to
come with a genuine desire to have God help you sort your life out. A
first step is to confess to God everything that you know about which you
think is wrong in your life and ask Him to help you live His way.

#### Confessing unforgiveness towards others {#confessing-unforgiveness-towards-others .list-paragraph}

Jesus said that if we don't forgive others, then He will not forgive us
(**Matthew 6:14**). If we are asking God to forgive us for all that we
have done and thought wrong, then we must also be prepared to forgive
***everyone, everything*** that they have done to us. Again, you do not
have to get this all sorted out before you become a Christian, but you
must ***want*** to get it all sorted out, and confessing the situations
to God is an important first step.

#### Confessing occult involvement {#confessing-occult-involvement .list-paragraph}

A great many people have had some sort of occult involvement and, as
much as is possible, any known involvement must be specifically
confessed, renounced and turned from. If you, or any close family member
or ancestor, are known to have been involved in anything in the list
below, this should be made known to a responsible, experienced Christian
since there may be the need for further help in coming to repentance and
gaining freedom from all occult influence. Any addictions, dependencies,
compulsions and mental problems should be shared in case they have
occult roots.

**A-Z of *possible* occult influences**: astrology, automatic writing,
bestiality, black or white magic, blood pacts, charms, clairvoyance,
cults (including Christian science, J.W.'s etc.), divining, E.S.P.,
eastern meditation, exclusive Christian fellowships, faith healing,
fantasy games (e.g. Dungeons and dragons), fortune telling, freemasonry,
homosexuality, horoscopes, hypnosis, levitation, martial arts (e.g.
karate), mediums, metaphysics, mysticism, necromancy, new age medicine
(all alternative treatments should be mentioned as some are occult
based) , new age philosophy, occult literature, Ouija boards, paganism,
pornography, science fiction (some are occult based), sexual perversion,
seances, superstitions, Tarot cards, telepathy, trances, Transcendental
meditation, witchcraft, Yoga, Zodiac charms.

Prayer for possible occult influences is best shared with at least two
mature Christians.

### Changed behaviour -- the evidence of repentance {#changed-behaviour-the-evidence-of-repentance .list-paragraph}

The fact that sin is defined as living in independence from God shows us
that repentance means that we must now trust God as Lord of our lives.
That means referring our decisions to Him, asking and trusting Him for
guidance and obeying His will as He reveals it to us. This is not simply
religious jargon. It is a practical day to day working out of a whole
new way of conducting our lives in relation to God rather than in
isolation from God. It is not simply bringing God into our lives, but
rather, bringing our lives to God. The Lordship of Christ starts with
repentance and is worked out as we grow in our relationship with God
over the years.

Repentance must be specific and have its fruits and not be just an
intellectual generality. Reasonable evidence of repentance is required
before a person is baptised (See **Luke 3:8** and **Acts 26:20**), but
perfection is not to be expected! Repentance does not guarantee that we
will not continue to commit the same sins (that may take some time and
good biblical teaching), but repentance does produce a genuine desire to
stop living in independence from God.

Jesus was in no hurry to press people into the kingdom, on the contrary,
He turned away those who were half hearted. Jesus required devotion and
obedience, not just sentimental expressions of "Oh yes! I believe in
Jesus" (**Luke 14:26-33, Luke 18:18-26**). Jesus requires us to walk in
the light; to be truthful with Him and with one another (**John
3:19-21**, **1 John 1:5-7**). We are required to forgive and accept
others if we are to receive forgiveness from God (**Matthew 6:14, Romans
15:7**). And we are to love one another in the body of Christ deeply,
with a sincere heart (**1 Peter 1:22**).

These requirements are not burdensome to those who have understood their
need for salvation and who know that God loves them unconditionally and
has their best interests at heart (see **John 14:21,** **1 John 5:3**).

So this is repentance: conviction, confession and changed behaviour. It
is the first part of the process of becoming a Christian. The second
part is to believe; to start trusting God.

## Faith {#faith .list-paragraph}

Faith is not blind belief in the unlikely or impossible, nor is it based
upon feelings. On the contrary, faith is firmly based upon facts. It is
the *facts* that are believed that are effective, not the *act* of
believing, but for us to *benefit* from those facts we do have to
believe them and put our trust in them.

In the New Testament there is one Greek word (*pistis*) which, as a
verb, is generally translated 'believe' and, as a noun, 'faith'. Faith
is what you have if you believe the facts sufficiently to actually
*trust* them. When a man let Blondin wheel him in a barrow across the
Niagara Falls on a tight rope it was an act of trust based upon
confident belief which in turn was based on sound facts (he had just
seen him walk across with terrific confidence). This kind of trust is
what the bible means by 'faith' and 'belief'. It is evident that the
safety of the man in the barrow depended not on his faith, but on the
truth of the claim that Blondin made about his ability. Given that God's
claims are true, our experience of them depends upon our faith.

Jesus said, "He who believes in Me has everlasting life." (**John
6:47**) but what exactly must be believed?

-   **Jesus is God's Son and our saviour**

    "These are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ,
    the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in His name."
    (**John 20:31**)

-   **God is who He says He is**

    "He who hears My word and believes in Him who sent Me has
    everlasting life, and shall not come into judgement, but has passed
    from death into life." (**John 5:24**)

-   **Jesus was raised from the dead**

    "If you confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus and believe in your
    heart that God has raised Him from the dead, you will be saved."
    (**Romans 10:9**)

-   **We are justified by Jesus' death**

"Our right-standing with God comes from God, through faith in Jesus
Christ, as a gift to all who believe. There is no difference between
*good* people and *bad* people; for all have sinned and fall short of
the glory of God. We are put right with God freely through faith in His
provision -- His Son who, through His death, took the penalty for our
rebellion against God upon Himself. By this means, God was able to
deliver us from the penalty for our sin without denying its seriousness.
He rightly judged us guilty and worthy of death, but provided His own
Son to die in place of those who put their trust in Jesus' death."
(**Romans 3:22-26,** my paraphrase)

Having understood the facts concerning salvation, and having come to a
place of believing them, we can only benefit from God's saving action by
putting our trust in Him. We must call out in prayer to God for Him to
cleanse our hearts, forgive us our rebellion against Him and give us a
new start. Repeating a set prayer is probably not the most meaningful
way that a repentant soul can call on God for salvation! It should be a
personal appeal to God.

## Baptism

Jesus commanded His followers to be baptised: "Go therefore and make
disciples of all the nations, baptising them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" (**Mat 28:19**). Baptism is not
optional for a believer; Jesus commanded it and so did the apostles:
"And he commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord (**Acts
10:48**). When the apostle Paul believed in Jesus, Ananias said to him,
"And now why are you waiting? Arise and be baptised, and wash away your
sins, calling on the name of the Lord." (= call out to God on the basis
of Jesus' death.) (**Acts 22:16**).

Baptism is an intrinsic part of becoming a Christian. The gospel message
is to "repent ***and be baptised***" (**Acts 2:38**). In the New
Testament, baptism is the immediate outward act which signifies faith in
Jesus. There was no question of delaying baptism until after a course of
teaching or until elaborate arrangements were made. The nearest suitable
pool of water was utilised to confirm a person's faith by baptism (see
**Acts 8:36-38**).

Over the years the church has tended to depart from the New Testament
practice of baptism, either by not baptising believers or by separating
it in time or understanding from the moment of coming to faith in Jesus.

#### What if I was baptised as an infant?

Many people have been *christened* or *baptised* as infants and may
wonder if they should be baptised as believers when they come to put
their trust in Jesus. Jesus commanded that those who put their faith in
Jesus should be baptised and we strongly urge believers to begin their
life of obedience to Christ by obeying His command to be baptised. (Even
Jesus, who was faithfully circumcised in the temple as a baby insisted
that He be baptised as a believer, **Mark 3:13-17**).

#### What is baptism?

In New Testament times baptism was an everyday occurrence. There were
baptism baths at every synagogue and in many larger homes. Devout Jews
would baptise themselves daily in an act of ritual washing (see **Heb
9:10**). Baptism was also used to signify that a person was devoted to a
particular Rabbi (**Jn 3:23ff, Acts 19:3**). Baptism was usually
self-administered by fully immersing oneself in a bath or pool, but when
this was not possible drenching with buckets of water was
acceptable.[^3]

Baptism (Greek *baptizo* usually means to be fully immersed in water,
like a sunken ship) is a physical event with a spiritual effect. It is
not merely a sign or symbol, but an integral part of the process of
conversion. Through baptism, God washes us from the presence and effect
of our sin, so that we have a clean conscience before God (see below **2
Peter 3:21, Titus 3:5**). In baptism we identify ourselves with Christ
in His death and resurrection. We die to our old lives and are 'born
again' as God's children:

> "Therefore we were buried with Him through baptism into death, that
> just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
> even so we also should walk in newness of life" (**Romans 6:4**).

#### What does Baptism do?

Baptism has a number of different aspects.

1)  **Obedience.** Baptism is to be completely covered and saturated by
    the medium in which we are baptised. Baptism in water means we are
    covered by the water. Baptism in Jesus means that we are submerged
    in Jesus, saturated by His life and submitted to His Lordship.
    Baptism seals our intention to be obedient to Jesus Christ.

2)  **Cleansed conscience**. We submerge ourselves in water in order to
    cleans ourselves. Baptism in Jesus washes us from our sin and guilt.
    In fact it is the Holy Spirit who does this washing:

> "Be baptised and wash your sins away" (**Acts 22:16**).
>
> "You were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name
> of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God" (**1
> Corinthians 6:11**).
>
> "He saved us through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the
> Holy Spirit" (**Titus 3:5**).
>
> "Baptism is not the removal of the filth of the flesh, but the appeal
> of a good conscience toward God through the resurrection of Jesus
> Christ" (**1 Pet 3:21**).

3)  **Death to our sinful nature**. Going under the water symbolises the
    end of our previous life. Baptism in Jesus is an identification with
    His death on the cross. "Do you not know that all of us who were
    baptised into Christ Jesus were baptised into His death?" (**Romans
    6:3**). This is not the bad news that it sounds like. It is
    amazingly good news. No other god offers death as a means to life.
    It is the stubborn grip with which we grasp our own lives which
    prevents us from receiving God's life. Sin is an addiction for which
    there is only one cure ‑ death! Everyone will be cured one day.
    Everyone will die. But Christ offers us the opportunity to die right
    now instead of having to wait for the end of our lives. It is
    incredible. In this day when everything is instant and people are
    not interested if you cannot give them what they want straight away,
    you offer them the chance of instant death and they say "No thanks,
    I prefer to wait for the end of my life". They do not know what they
    are missing! Jesus says to us "You know that habit you are
    struggling with, you know that thing you are addicted to, you know
    those reactions you cannot control\... well, you can die right now
    in Me so that those things will no longer enslave you." Well, I say,
    "If my flesh is condemned to die anyway, and it is only a hindrance
    to me, then let me die!" Baptism is our acceptance of this amazing
    offer.

4)  **New life**. When we come up out of the water it is like a new
    birth. "We were buried with Him through baptism into death in order
    that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the
    Father, we too may live a new life" (**Romans 6:4**). Jesus not only
    provides baptism in water for our death, but He is the water of
    Life. Even though we die with Christ, it is completely impossible
    for us to remain dead. All the mighty power of God is at work in
    Christ to make us alive (**Ephesians 1:19‑20, 2:6**). It is quite
    simply impossible for any one to resist that power. If we have died
    with Christ than we are also raised up with Him. The power that
    raised up Him who bore the sin of the whole world should just about
    be able to manage the burden of my sin! We do not have to try to be
    resurrected with Christ, God raises us up.

5)  **A changed nature**. God does not make us better -- He makes us
    new! We do not receive the kiss of life. God has not condemned our
    flesh only to bring it back to life again. Resurrection is not
    restoration. God does not look at us and say, "We will put a patch
    on here, and replace that bit of rot there, oil this bit and polish
    that bit." No! God says "Yuk, that old life is disgusting. We can't
    do anything with that. It is beyond repair. Look, you had better
    have a new life. Here, have mine." **2 Corinthians 5:17** "If anyone
    is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has gone, the new has
    come." **Ephesians 4:24** "Put on the new nature, created to be like
    God in true righteousness and holiness."

6)  **Discipleship**. Baptism was a Jewish custom indicating that you
    were giving your allegiance to a particular teacher. In the
    Corinthian church some of the brothers were saying "I follow Paul",
    some "I follow Apollos" and some "I follow Cephas" and the super
    spiritual ones "I follow Christ, so there!" So Paul says "Were you
    baptised into Paul? Christ did not send me to baptise but to preach
    the gospel" (**1 Corinthians 1:12**‑**17**). The early Christians
    had to learn that baptism was not to symbolise their allegiance to a
    particular preacher, congregation or theological position, but their
    allegiance to Christ.

> Jesus said that we were to "**Make disciples** \... and baptise them"
> (**Matthew 28:19**). He did not say "Make converts, baptise them and
> disciple those who will let you." Conversion (what ever that means) is
> not the issue. It is discipleship. "He who hears these words of mine
> and does them, he is My disciple". Baptism is the first act of
> obedience in a life devoted to obedience to Jesus.

7)  **Declaration of our faith.** Baptism is a declaration before
    witnesses (usually church, family and friends) that you have
    identified yourself with the death and resurrection of Jesus, who
    died to set you free from your sin and rose to give you new life.
    The person being baptised often wants to invite friends and family
    along. However, baptism should *not* be seen primarily as an
    evangelistic event. It is first and foremost a ***personal
    spiritual*** event in which the past is buried, the conscience
    cleansed and the power of the Holy Spirit received. The depth and
    reality of this spiritual experience should be paramount even in a
    large evangelistic event.

Baptism, then, means submission, repentance, death to the old life,
being filled with His life, putting on the new nature and loving and
obeying Him.

Jesus said that it was fitting to fulfil all righteousness in being
baptised. And when He was baptised the Holy Spirit came upon Him, and
God said "This is My Son in whom I am well pleased." When we give
ourselves to die and be raised again with Christ, Jesus says "I died for
you, and I am so glad that I did!"

Having repented, started to believe and trust God, received the Holy
Spirit and been baptised in water, you have completed the four steps of
becoming a Christian; you have been 'born again' and can look forward to
growing in your faith as you are sanctified by the ongoing work of the
Holy Spirit and look forward to your eventual glorification.

## Receiving the Holy Spirit

Having repented, believed, called on God for salvation and begun to
trust Him for His forgiveness and love, you are ready to receive the
promised Holy Spirit. This is the third stage in becoming a Christian.
It is the most crucial part of becoming a Christian. It is the Holy
Spirit who makes us a child of God. Everything else is preparing the way
for us to receive Him. It is a definite experience which usually
precedes, but sometimes follows, water baptism, but never in the New
Testament are the two events simultaneous[^4].

It is the Holy Spirit who gives us new life -- new-birth: Jesus said, "I
tell you the truth, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is
born of water and the Spirit. Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the Spirit
gives birth to spirit" **(John 3:5-6).** He said that after He had been
glorified (ascended into heaven after His resurrection) the Holy Spirit
would be given to those who put their trust in Him (**John 7:38-39,
14:16,26, 15:26**)

> "It is for your good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the
> Counsellor will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you."
> **(John 16:7)**

The Holy Spirit is God's seal and guarantee that we have been adopted as
His children (see **Romans 8:16,** **Ephesians 1:13-14,** **1 John
4:13**). His presence within us is a witness to the powers of darkness
that we belong to God, forbidding them power over our lives. It is also
an inner witness to us as we recognise the Spirit within us crying out
"Father" to our heavenly Father, bearing witness that we are His
children.

Also He washes and renews our hearts and conscience:

> "He saved us, not because of righteous things we had done, but because
> of his mercy. He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal
> by the Holy Spirit." (**Titus 3:5**)

He helps us in our weakness:

> "The Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to
> pray, but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us with groans that words
> can not express." **(Romans 8:26)**
>
> "I pray that He may strengthen you with power through His Spirit in
> your inner being, so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through
> faith."\
> **(Ephesians 3:16-17)**

He gives us hope and joy:

> "May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so
> that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit."
> **(Romans 15:13)**

He gives life to our mortal bodies:

> "If the Spirit of Him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in you,
> He who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal
> bodies through His Spirit, who lives in you." (**Romans 8:11**)

He reveals the Fathers thoughts and plans for us:

> "No eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what God has
> prepared for those who love him, but God has revealed it to us by His
> Spirit. The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God"\
> (**1 Corinthians 2:9-10**)

He transforms us into the image of Christ:

> "We all, with unveiled face, behold as in a mirror the glory of the
> Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory to glory,
> just as by the Spirit of the Lord." (**2 Corinthians 3:18**)

We know that we have received the Holy Spirit because He gives a witness
within our hearts that we are now a child of God (**Romans 8:16**).
Things will begin to change. You will find attitudes begin to change,
believing God becomes easier, you will want to deal with sin in your
life, you will experience inner peace and so on.

### Baptism in the Holy Spirit

There seem to be three distinct levels or experiences of receiving the
Holy Spirit, although the scriptures are not consistent in the words
used to describe them and there is much ongoing debate about it. These
are:

1)  Receiving the **indwelling** Holy Spirit at conversion by which we
    cry "Abba Father" (**Gal 4:6**). The indwelling Holy Spirit produces
    a variety of godly fruits, just as the life sustaining sap in a tree
    produces fruit (See **John 15** and **Galatians 5:22-23**). These
    are real, recognisable, effective and enduring. They grow in us
    rather than come upon us.

2)  Being **baptised** in the Holy Spirit, by which we are empowered
    (**Acts 1:8**) and receive gifts for building up the church (**1
    Corinthians 12-14**).

3)  Being **filled** with the Holy Spirit which brings a special and
    temporary experience such as joy (**Acts 13:52**) or revelation
    (**Acts 7:55**).

Having received the indwelling Holy Spirit at conversion, we should ask
God to baptise us in the Holy Spirit. This is described as a filling or
a drink (**Acts 2:4, Ephesians 5:18,** **1 Corinthians 12:13**)
indicating the awareness of being filled by God and with God.

Through the Baptism in the Holy Spirit, the gifts of the Holy Spirit
become available to us. These are things such as prophecy, revelation,
visions, words of knowledge, healing, praying in tongues and
interpretation of tongues. These gifts are given by the Holy Spirit to
help us build up the church:

> "But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each one for the
> profit of all."\
> (**1 Corinthians 12:7**)
>
> "Since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, try to excel in gifts
> that build up the church." (**1 Corinthians 14:12**)
>
> "When you come together, everyone has a hymn, or a word of
> instruction, a revelation, a tongue or an interpretation. All of these
> must be done for the strengthening of the church." (**1 Corinthians
> 14:26**)

Having been baptised in the Holy Spirit, we need to stir up the gifts
within us and use them:

> "Therefore I remind you to stir up the gift of God which is in you
> through the laying on of my hands. For God has not given us a spirit
> of fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind." (**2 Timothy
> 1:6-7**)

Baptism in the Holy Spirit is normally received through the laying on of
hands immediately following baptism:

"When they heard this, they were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul had laid hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them,
and they spoke with tongues and prophesied." (**Acts 19:5-6)**

It is usually evidenced by speaking in tongues or prophecy:

> "All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in
> other tongues as the Spirit enabled them." **(Acts 2:4)**
>
> "When Paul placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and
> they spoke in tongues and prophesied." **(Acts 19:6)**

Sometimes a person is not baptised in the Holy Spirit when they are
first prayed for, and this can be distressing, but Jesus said that we
should go on asking until He is received (**Luke 11:13**). It may be
that there is some area of sin or unbelief or a curse which is hindering
the receiving of the Holy Spirit, but this will come to light as we
continue to pray.

The Holy Spirit coming upon us should not be seen as a once-off
experience, but as the beginning of a lifetime of drinking and filling.
Some people seem to have powerful experiences of the Holy Spirit coming
upon them frequently, other much less frequently. The thing is to stay
thirsty and keep drinking.

Some people are baptised in the Holy Spirit without anyone praying for
them; God just does it! Others receive when they pray for themselves,
but most receive through others praying for them. Sometimes we may have
to persevere in prayer for some time ("Ask, seek, knock ...") or we may
need to call on leaders with greater authority to pray (as in Samaria).
But we should not give up praying and asking until the Holy Spirit has
clearly been given. Jesus has promised the Holy Spirit and He wants us
to be baptised in the Holy Spirit.

18 Baptism in the Holy Spirit

### The Gifts of the Holy Spirit

In addition to all the blessings listed above, the Holy Spirit also
gives various gifts for building ourselves up and strengthening the
church. These are things such as prophecy, revelation, visions, words of
knowledge, healing, praying in tongues and interpretation of tongues:

"But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each one for the profit
of all... the message of wisdom ... or knowledge, faith, gifts of
healing, miraculous powers, prophecy, distinguishing between spirits,
speaking in different kinds of tongues, and the interpretation of
tongues." (**1 Corinthians 12:7-10**)

"When you come together, everyone has a hymn, or a word of instruction,
a revelation, a tongue or an interpretation. All of these must be done
for the strengthening of the church." (**1 Corinthians 14:26**)

Having been baptised in the Holy Spirit, we need to stir up the
spiritual gifts He gives us and use them:

"Since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, try to excel in gifts that
build up the church." (**1 Corinthians 14:12**)

"Therefore I remind you to stir up the gift of God which is in you
through the laying on of my hands. For God has not given us a spirit of
fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind." (**2 Timothy
1:6-7**)

#### Speaking in Tongues

The first gift most people receive is the gift of tongues. It is of
tremendous benefit within both corporate and personal worship allowing
the unhindered expression of our hearts to the Father without the
limitation of having to form suitable words with our minds and
understanding. It is a spirit inspired language which we cannot
understand with our minds, but which we can use at our will to worship
God, pray for situations and build up our spirits:

He who speaks in a tongue edifies himself, but he who prophesies edifies
the church. I would like every one of you to speak in tongues ... For if
I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful. So what
shall I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray with my
mind; I will sing with my spirit, but I will also sing with my mind. If
you are praising God with your spirit ..."\
(**1 Corinthians 14:4-5**,**14-16**)

"Build yourselves up in your most holy faith and pray in the Holy
Spirit."**\
**(**Jude 1:20**)

Baptism in the Holy Spirit 19

As Paul says here, when speaking in tongues, our minds are not involved.
We can be thinking about anything under the sun whilst we are speaking
in tongues. Therefore, whilst speaking in tongues we should also pray
and worship God with our minds.

Most people who speak in tongues wonder if they are just making up
nonsense and this can put them off from using the gift. But it is
important to understand that speaking in tongues is a spiritual act of
faith which our flesh will usually object to. Remember that:

"The sinful nature desires what is contrary to the Spirit, and the
Spirit what is contrary to the sinful nature." (**Galatians 5:17**)

"The man without the Spirit does not accept the things that come from
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot
understand them, because they are spiritually discerned." (**1
Corinthians 2:14**)

Spiritual discernment grows with practice -- and practice implies
experimentation and getting it wrong sometimes. Even if we speak a load
of gibberish when we first try to speak in tongues, God will very soon
make it 'spiritually' effective. It may be that our prophecies are
mostly from us initially -- but the Father will be pleased to give
maturity to these efforts so that His body may be increasingly built up.

We should practice using our spiritual language both on our own and in
worship together. Sometimes singing in tongues will break through our
fleshly weariness and bring us into a wonderful sense of God's presence,
other times we may not be conscious of any benefit at the time, but
later we will reap the fruit of having persevered against the flesh in
singing or praying in tongues.

#### Interpretation of Tongues

Having started to pray and worship in tongues we should ask God for the
gift of interpretation of tongues:

"For this reason anyone who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may
interpret what he says." (**1 Corinthians 14:13**)

An interpretation is not a literal word-for-word translation but the
re-phrasing of what was given in the Spirit in the words of the person
giving the interpretation. It will therefore have the characteristics of
the person giving the interpretation, but the content has been revealed
to their spirit by the Holy Spirit.

We may interpret our own tongue or that given by someone else. Usually
it is a prayer or praise to God, but sometimes it is an encouragement or
instruction from God. Often, two or more people will have the same
interpretation which confirms that it is genuine. Don't worry about
getting it wrong. If you have the slightest hint that God has given you
the first word or two of an interpretation or prophecy, then say so. You
can say "I think maybe the interpretation is... (or God is saying ...)."
Don't worry if you don't have a complete picture. You may have the
beginning and someone else the rest of it.

#### Prophecy

Much that has been said about interpretation of tongues applies also to
prophecy. It is Spirit to spirit communication which we have to find
words in order to express. It will therefore be expressed through our
words, character and understanding and will inevitably be incomplete and
imperfect. But that does not make prophecy any less vital and
significant. The gift of prophecy grows through use and you should keep
stepping out in faith and let the person who is discipling you help you
to learn to discern what is from God and what is from your imagination.

20 Baptism in the Holy Spirit

#### Other Spiritual gifts

You will learn about the other gifts as you grow in your faith. The main
thing is to keep pressing on by actively practising the gifts of
tongues, interpretation and prophecy, and responding to the Holy Spirit
whenever you think He may be prompting you.

#### Testing the Gifts

Just as God wants us to be confident of His love for us, and our
acceptance in Christ, so also He wants us to be confident and secure in
the Spiritual gifts. He says that we are to test, weigh and prove the
Spiritual gifts. We are not testing God, but ourselves.

"Do not quench the Spirit. Do not despise prophecies. Test all things;
hold fast what is good." (1 **Thessalonians 5:16**)

This testing is done by the witness of the Holy Spirit in the hearts of
the hearers, and is ultimately the responsibility of the leaders or
elders present:

"Let two or three prophets speak, and let the others judge." (**1
Corinthians 14:29**)

## Going on in the Spirit 

The Holy Spirit coming upon us should not be seen as a once-off
experience, but as the beginning of a lifetime of drinking and filling.
Some people seem to have powerful experiences of the Holy Spirit coming
upon them frequently, other much less frequently. The thing is to stay
thirsty and keep drinking.

Having repented, started to believe and trust God, been baptised in
water and in the Holy Spirit, you have completed the four steps of
becoming a Christian; you have been 'born again' and can look forward to
growing in your faith as you are sanctified by the ongoing work of the
Holy Spirit and look forward to your eventual glorification.

[^1]: ^1^ W. Barclay, "Daily Study Bible -- John, vol. 1", p115

[^2]: ^2^ J. Packer, "Evangelism and the Sovereignty of God", p 62

[^3]: ^4^ The Didache, Chapter 7:1-7, (circa 100 AD). See also 1 Kings
    18:33. In the Septuagint (an early Greek translation), Elijah
    *baptised* the offering on Mount Carmel by pouring buckets of water
    over it.

[^4]: ^3^ D. Pawson, "The Normal Christian Birth", p63
