---
title: Hurdles to Atheism
type: document
---
"Has anyone provided proof of God's inexistence? Not even close. Has
quantum cosmology explained the emergence of the universe or why it is
here? Not even close. Have our sciences explained why our universe seems
to be fine-tuned to allow for the existence of life? Not even close. Are
physicists and biologists willing to believe in anything so long as it
is not religious thought? Close enough. Has rationalism and moral
thought provided us with an understanding of what is good, what is
right, and what is moral? Not close enough. Has secularism in the
terrible 20th century been a force for good? Not even close, to being
close. Is there a narrow and oppressive orthodoxy in the sciences? Close
enough. Does anything in the sciences or their philosophy justify the
claim that religious belief is irrational? Not even in the ball park. Is
scientific atheism a frivolous exercise in intellectual contempt? Dead
on." **David Berlinski,Â [The Devil\'s Delusion: Atheism and Its
Scientific Pretensions](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/1639458)**

# Hurdles to Scientific Atheism

The Big Bang is predicted by Einstein\'s Field Equations, but it lacks
any cause. Something made it happen, but theory offers no suggestions as
to what.

The Big-Bang is the instantaneous creation of space, time and matter out
of nothing. It is based on equations that describe probabilities, yet
for the universe to exist it requires a virtually infinitely improbable
minute imbalance between various types of sub-atomic particle ( a ratio
of 10^9^: 1+10^9^) and an initial density equal to a critical density to
an accuracy of 1:10^55^. Any variation from this critical density would
result in a universe that lived for only 10^-44^ seconds or consisted of
only scattered individual particles!

The equations of fundamental physics have no concept of \"now\" or of
the direction of time (past and future). Although we observe processes,
such as the increase of entropy, happening only in one direction, there
is nothing in the underlying equations to say they only happen in one
direction. Only observation supplies evidence for time having a
direction, and it poses the question -- where did the original *order*
originate from? This is a question that scientific theories have no
answer for.

Quantum Theory has proved very powerful at describing observable
phenomena, including many biological processes. However its equations
require an \"observer\" that is outside the quantum system -- indeed
they strongly suggest that the observer must be conscious! Physicists
and philosophers have no solution as to how that observer can arise --
what consciousness is and why it has such a decisive effect on quantum
particles!

Life requires water on planet earth. Yet the science of planet formation
means that any water that was present in the cosmic dust from which the
earth formed would have evaporated into space long before life could
form. It is supposed that water was delivered to earth after it cooled
sufficiently, by some asteroid from outer space. \"Understanding how
water arrived on Earth is a key part of understanding how and when life
evolved here as well. But we don't even know how it where it came
from.\" (Sabrina Stierwalt, October 6, 2019 Scientific American)

All life contains DNA. The theory of evolution supposes that DNA formed
by random processes in hot springs, and that the first DNA molecule
somehow reproduced itself. No one has any theory for how DNA reproduces
itself. It has never been observed and it is now acknowledged that DNA
is incapable of reproducing itself, no matter how many nutrients are
provided or how long is allowed. (Dennis Noble, Oxford University --
Music of Life lectures).

Evolutionary Theory asserts and depends upon several theses:

1.  DNA contains the instructions for making all the cells of an
    organism and is solely responsible for the organism produced.

2.  Acquired attributes (the experiences during the life of the
    organism) do not affect the DNA and therefore cannot be transmitted
    through reproduction.

3.  DNA changes through random mutations over long periods of time.

4.  The death of organisms is required to allow more successful DNA to
    be reproduced more frequently than less successful DNA. This leads
    to evolutionary progress and the emergence of new species.

Modern Systems Biology has demonstrated that each of these pillars is
false! (\"What is life\"-lecture to Karolinska Institute in Sweden:
Denis Noble, May 2014). In 2006 Dawkins published the now famous \"The
Selfish Gene\" which depends entirely upon Neo Darwinism and is the
basis of much so-called scientific atheism. However, in the same year
Denis Noble published \"The Music of Life\" in which he shows that Neo
Darwinism has been disproved and cannot be the way that life has
evolved.

The number of random combinations of DNA genes is 10^72403^. The number
of atoms in the entire universe is about 10^80^. What is more, cells
have been shown to employ multiple alternative mechanisms to buffer the
effect of gene mutation. So gene mutation rarely results in changed
behaviour at the cellular level, let alone the organism level.

Modern Systems Biology shows that complete organisms are required for
their parts to function at all and have any biological purpose. Thus
organisms replicate genes for their own purpose, rather than Genes using
organisms to replicate themselves (as claimed by Dawkins). (See
\"Neo-Darwinism, the Modern Synthesis and selfish genes: are they of use
in physiology?\" Journal of Physiology. 2011 Mar 1; 589(Pt 5):
1007--1015.)

Goldfish from Carp DNA.

Complex language amongst the simplest tribes.

Jordon Peterson

Developments in Geology and Archaeology -- Flood evidence

Anthony Flew denounced atheism.

Flew stated that \"the most impressive arguments for God's existence are
those that are supported by recent scientific discoveries\" and that
\"the argument to Intelligent Design is enormously stronger than it was
when I first met it\". The argument of ID is that evidenced objects and
physical concepts are either too simple or too complex to be simply
natural, whichever of the two extremes one chooses to be the hallmark of
design by an outside intelligence. Flew supported the idea of an
Aristotelian God with \"the characteristics of power and also
intelligence\", stating that the \[scientific\] evidence for it was
stronger than ever before. (Habermas, Gary R. (9 December 2004), \"My
Pilgrimage from Atheism to Theism: An Exclusive Interview with Former
British Atheist Professor Antony Flew\")

\"The only reason which I have for beginning to think of believing in a
First Cause god is the impossibility of providing a naturalistic account
of the origin of the first reproducing organisms.\"
