---
title: Letter to Tom Wright re the Gospel
type: document
---
Dear Tom

I have been reading some of your books recently and have been excited to
read such a passionate presentation of the Gospel of the Kingdom.

For decades I had been asking the question, "Why is the gospel not in
the Gospels?" and just getting bemused looks and feeble answers from
those I asked. A couple of years ago I finally decided I had to get
serious with this question and reread all the Gospels (Matthew to Acts)
several times trying to get to grips with "what is the gospel of the
Gospels?"

Gradually it became clearer that it is all about the Kingdom and that
the gospel is misrepresented when referred to as the gospel of Jesus. It
was an eye opener to realise that the gospel was centred on the Kingdom
rather than the Cross, as we see for example in the last verse of Acts.
As you show in your book "How God became King", the cross was how the
Kingdom came, rather than the main event. I liken the cross to the
engine in a car. Without it the car cannot go anywhere, but the engine
is not the point. We do not endlessly worship and celebrate the engine;
we get in the car and go places. You don't need to understand how the
engine works, but you most certainly need the engine. In the same way,
the cross makes the kingdom possible and powers the kingdom, and without
it we cannot enter the kingdom, but we don't need to understand how it
works (theories of atonement) to benefit from its power. Neither should
the engine take our attention away from its purpose in powering the car.
It seems to me that a great deal of church life has got so fixated on
the cross and singing songs and hymns endlessly celebrating the cross,
that we have lost sight of its purpose in empowering God's people to
establish God's Kingdom on earth "as it is in heaven".

I have decided to write to you because I have some questions about the
implications of all this for mission, to which I have not as yet found
answers. I have no doubt you have written about these and wondered if
you could point me in the right direction.

I have two specific areas of application in mind. I am involved in
mission in rural areas in Liberia where we go into unreached villages,
heal the sick and tell people about Jesus and establish small groups of
disciples. Also in Liberia we work with churches in communities where
there are many other churches, but the churches are almost completely
ineffective in disciple-making. Typically when I ask the pastor how many
disciples of Jesus he thinks there are in his church, they will say less
than five.

My second area of application is here at home in rural England, where I
am a church warden in the village CofE church (though I am not from a
CofE background and do not consider myself to be CofE.)

With these very different mission contexts in mind I have been trying to
work out a biblical, authentic and relevant way of sharing the Good news
of the Kingdom. The great advantage of the gospel I was brought up on
(the fore spiritual laws, bridge illustration, etc.) is that it is so
easy to explain. In my efforts to convert myself and others to "The
Gospel of the Kingdom" a major challenge has been to find a suitably
simple and succinct way of expressing it. Most people's eyes glaze over
after a few minutes.

As far as I can see, the New Testament offers scant assistance here. The
four Gospels present us with the *presence* of the Kingdom, which we
valiantly (or not so valiantly) attempt to incarnate. This is much more
evident in Liberia where healing and deliverance is a normal expression
of the Kingdom; but more difficult in the UK where so few people even
ask for healing. But we are commissioned by Jesus to proclaim the Gospel
, not just to incarnate it. The majority of examples I have found in the
NT showing how the Gospel was proclaimed are in a Jewish context with
reference to the Fathers and prophets, and that is mostly what we see
within the four Gospels and Acts (for example Acts 13:16-41). We get a
tantalising glimpse of Paul re-working this for a gentile audience in
Acts 17:22-31, but most frustratingly the account is cut off at the
crucial point and we are left guessing how Paul might have introduced
the Gospel of the Kingdom. However, what we do see is that Paul starts
in a very different place, with God as creator, guide and judge.

Elsewhere we see evidence that the apostles did not confuse the Gospel
with the teaching that Jesus is the Messiah, Saviour and King E.g. Acts
28:32. I also now see in a way that I never noticed before, how much the
Kingdom, as distinct from the Cross is part of the astonishing Good news
that the apostle's enthuse about in the letters -- Ephesians 1 being an
example.

(Here I feel I must apologise for this rather long winded letter!)

Paul warns us against departing from the simplicity of the Gospel, and
it is at this very point that I stumble. The evangelical gospel was
simple, but I am now convinced, not actually the Gospel. I also think it
is pretty ineffective and inadequate. How do we
approach *proclaiming *the Gospel of the Kingdom?

I was hoping to find some answers or suggestions in "Simply Good News"
but that, and the other books I have read seem to be addressed to the
Christian community with help on how to understand and incarnate the
gospel rather than how to proclaim / share this Gospel with others. Paul
clearly devoted much time and effort in presenting the Gospel of the
Kingdom to unbelieving Gentiles through teaching and in one-to-one
conversations and it is that aspect that I wish to explore.

Can you point me to some helpful books dealing with this?

What are your thoughts about proclaiming the Gospel of the Kingdom to
illiterate people in Africa who only know about ancestral worship and
secret religious rituals, single-mothers with messed-up relationships on
our estates and contentedly retired couples who keep themselves busy
volunteering in various community groups, but have no interest in
"religion" (which I also have no interest in!).

Your, in Him

Stephen Dolley (sjdolley\@gmail.com)
