---
title: Faith Promises
type: document
---
# Faith Promises

Lk 15:31 "Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours."

Jn 14:12-15 "He who believes in Me, the works that I do he will do also;
and greater works than these he will do, because I go to My Father. And
whatever you ask in My name, that I will do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. If you ask anything in My name, I will do it."

Jn 16:23-24 "Whatever you ask the Father in My name He will give you.
... Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be full."

2Co 10:4-5 "For the weapons of our warfare are mighty in God for pulling
down strongholds, casting down arguments and every high thing that
exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ."

Lk 7:23 "Blessed is he who is not offended because of Me." (Do not
treasure up disappointments)

Phil 4:7 "And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will
guard your hearts and minds (against disappointment) through Christ
Jesus."

Rom 6:11 Reckon yourselves to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

Jam 5:16 Confess your trespasses to one another, and pray for one
another, that you may be healed. The effective, fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much.

Isa 53:3-5 By His stripes we are healed.

Mk 16:17-18 "These signs will follow those who believe: In My name they
will cast out demons; they will speak with new tongues; they will take
up serpents; and if they drink anything deadly, it will by no means hurt
them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover."

Rom 8:37 "Yet in all these things we are more than conquerors through
Him who loved us."

Jam 1:5-8 "If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to
all liberally and without reproach, and it will be given to him. But let
him ask in faith, with no doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of
the sea driven and tossed by the wind. For let not that man suppose that
he will receive anything from the Lord; he is a double-minded man,
unstable in all his ways."

2 Pet 1:2-4 "Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of
God and of Jesus our Lord, as His divine power has given to us all
things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him
who called us by glory and virtue, by which have been given to us
exceedingly great and precious promises, that through these you may be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in
the world through lust."

Mk 11:23-24 "For assuredly, I say to you, whoever says to this mountain,
'Be removed and be cast into the sea,' and does not doubt in his heart,
but believes that those things he says will be done, he will have
whatever he says. Therefore I say to you, whatever things you ask when
you pray, believe that you receive them, and you will have them."

1 Cor 2:16 For who has known the mind of the LORD that he may instruct
Him? But we have the mind of Christ.

Rom 15:13 "Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit."

Eph 3:20 "Now to Him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,"

Heb 13:5 He Himself has said, "I will never leave you nor forsake you."

Jn 10:10 "I have come that they may have life, and that they may have it
more abundantly."

1 Jn 4:4 "You are of God, little children, and have overcome them,
because He who is in you is greater than he who is in the world."
