---
title: Sharing in the Divine Nature
type: document
---
# Sharing the Righteousness of Christ

Heb 1:9 You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore
God, your God has set you above your companions by anointing you with
the oil of joy.

Rom 1:16-17 is how unrighteous man can become righteous. It is by faith
according to the Gospel of Christ.

Rom 3:20-22 because by the works of the Law no flesh will be justified
in His sight; for through the Law comes the knowledge of sin. But now
apart from the Law the righteousness of God has been manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets,

Rom 4:3 Abraham is an example from scripture... "Abraham believed God,
and it was credited to him as righteousness."

Rom 4:5 -- the same way for us all. "But to the one who does not work,
but believes in Him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited as
righteousness,"

Rom 4:9 it is faith in gods promises, not faith in Jesus' sacrifice. But
the Gospel requires that this faith includes faith that Jesus is God
incarnate. Faith that Israel is God's chosen people is not enough (Rom
9:31). Our faith must include not labouring for our own righteousness
and therefore must include faith that God gives us righteousness as a
gift.

"For not knowing about God's righteousness and seeking to establish
their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
4For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who
believes." (Rom 10:3-4)

Rom 5:1 "Therefore, having been justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ,"

Rom 9:30 What shall we say then? That Gentiles, who did not pursue
righteousness, attained righteousness, even the righteousness which is
by faith;

\"Righteousness by faith\" is a transaction, an experience. It is
submitting to \"the righteousness of God.\" It is a change of standing
before God and His law. It is a regeneration, a new birth. Because of
this it is not simply a cover for unrepentant sin, allowing us to live
as we wish.

Rom 6, "Offer yourself to God..." Yielding to Christ's righteousness is
required for us to be sanctified. It is His work in us which we can give
ourselves to or resist. But we have to do the giving. It is offering,
sacrificing, giving ourselves over to His transformation, rather than a
grudging allowing Him to correct us in small measure.

We are sanctified by the truth. As we meditate on God's purity and
righteousness we are drawn into Him and see righteousness as more and
more attractive.

Christ is both the author and finisher of our faith; He justifies and
sanctifies us.

God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might
become the righteousness of God. **2 Cor 5:21**

## Others {#others .H2-Numbered}

1 Cor 1:30, 31 It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who
has become for us wisdom from God---that is, our righteousness, holiness
and redemption. Therefore, as it is written: "Let the one who boasts
boast in the Lord."

"You must be righteous even as your father in heaven is righteous.

# My thoughts

Hebrews 10:22 let us draw near to God with a sincere heart and with the
full assurance that faith brings, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse
us from a guilty conscience and having our bodies washed with pure
water. 

Hebrews 9:9 This is an illustration for the present time, indicating
that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the
conscience of the worshiper. 

1 John 1:9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just and will
forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness. 

1 John 2:28 And now, little children, abide in Him, that when He
appears, we may have confidence and not be ashamed before Him at His
coming. 

Galatians 2:16 know that a person is not justified by the works of the
law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So we, too, have put our faith in
Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the
works of the law, because by the works of the law no one will be
justified. 

Galatians 3:9 So those who rely on faith are blessed along with Abraham,
the man of faith. 

Galatians 3:27 for all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed
yourselves with Christ. 

Hebrews 9:28 so Christ was sacrificed once to take away the sins of
many; and he will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring
salvation to those who are waiting for him. - there is nothing more that
needs to be done for our son. Jesus has already done it all. 

Do you feel Teflon-coated clean? All-the-time clean? That your sin and
shortcomings do not and cannot make you dirty or give you a guilty
conscience? That you do not need to confess your sins to God in order to
draw near to him with joy and confidence. 

Hebrews 10:14 For by one sacrifice he has made perfect forever those who
are being made holy. 

Hebrews 10:17-18 Then he adds: \"Their sins and lawless acts I will
remember no more.\" And where these have been forgiven, sacrifice for
sin is no longer necessary. 

It is not just about Jesus obtaining forgiveness for our sins. Wonderful
as that is, it is not all that his death has achieved for us. We can
know we are forgiven, but still be very conscious of our sinfulness. Our
conscience can condemn us even though we know God does not. 

We need to know our sins are forgiven as a free gift, with nothing at
all for us to contribute. But in order for us to have a clean conscience
we also need to know that Christ is our righteousness. Our identity is
Christ, not mucky me. My conscience is his conscience, my confidence is
his confidence, my righteousness is his righteousness. And this not as a
doctrinal truth but as a felt reality. 

If our conscience condemns us when we have learnt to live in Christ,
then we know something is seriously wrong! We must not suppress that
warning, but pay attention to the discipline of the Lord. 

\"if our conscience does not condemn us\...\" 

Yet this treasure is hidden in jars of clay. That is how God wants it to
be.  

2 Corinthians 4:7 But we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that
this all-surpassing power is from God and not from us. 

I used to feel that my every action and thought was scrutinised by God
and found wanting. Although I knew I was forgiven and accepted in
Christ, it still left me feeling I was basically displeasing to God,
always falling short. This made fellowship with him a bit like a visit
to the dentist, necessary but not a pleasant prospect. Instead my basic
inclination was to avoid him except for allotted quiet times. 

 

# Sharing in Intercession

The mystery of prayer

The scriptures never really explain prayer. Why do we need to pray to a
loving God who knows the thoughts of our hearts, knows our needs better
than we do, who clothes the lilies and feeds the sparrows without them
asking? Jesus told us to pray but never explained why it is necessary.

However the scriptures tell us some intriguing truths about prayer. We
are given some familiar examples of intercessory prayer in characters
such as Abraham, Moses, Samuel and Elijah. Isaiah tells us that God was
searching through the land looking for someone to intercede for Israel,
but found no one. Jesus interceded for Peter (Lk 22:31), and for all of
us (Jn 17).

See zech 12:10

In each of these cases it is clear that God himself was provoking and
motivating the intercession. This tells us something very important
about intercession. It is not men trying to move the hand of God, but
God trying to engage men in His mission. However strange this may seem
to us, it is essential to understand that all effective prayer
originates in God\'s heart, not ours. That is why John says, if we know
we pray according to his will we know we have received whatever we ask
(1Jn 5:14-15).

The new testament tells us two extraordinary facts in relation to
prayer, the significance of which I think has largely gone unnoticed.
The first is that the Holy Spirit intercedes for us (Rom 8:26), the
second is that Jesus intercedes for it us (Heb 7:25)

Romans 8:26 In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do
not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes
for us through wordless groans.

Romans 8:27 Now He who searches the hearts knows what the mind of the
Spirit \[is,\] because He makes intercession for the saints according to
\[the will of\] God.

Hebrews 7:25 Therefore he is able to save completely those who come to
God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them. 

Romans8:34 Who \[is\] he who condemns? \[It is\] Christ who died, and
furthermore is also risen, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us.

The fact that both the Holy Spirit and Jesus are engaged in intercession
tells us that intercession has nothing to do with moving God on behalf
of men, but rather it is to share in a divine mystery. As Paul says in
Rome 8:27 the Spirit intercedes according to the will of God. It is
God\'s will that we intercede before Him.

Jesus and the Holy Spirit make intercession and the Father receives it.
Virtually all biblical prayers are addressed to the Father. Although
Jesus does give us authority to pray to him promising that he will
answer 

John14:13-14 And whatever you ask in My name, that I will do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. If you ask anything in My name, I
will do \[it.\]

By the Holy Spirit working and living within us, we are 'caught up' into
what we might call the divine dialogue of the Trinity.

Intercession is part of the inner working of God Himself. Why this
should be and how it works we will perhaps never know, but to know this
fact transforms our understanding of prayer and intercession.
Intercession is no longer seen as man pleading with God, but rather men
sharing in God\'s very nature. Seen like this prayer becomes full of
faith and joy. It becomes an adventure exploring the very heart of God
and sharing in His passions and purposes for the world. To truly pray is
to be caught up with the Holy Spirit into God\'s throne room; not to
plead with God but to rule with him.

All we have to do is to choose to take time to pray and to put
ourselves, as it were, 'at God's disposal', allowing the Spirit to do
the work within us.

Prayer and especially intercession is sharing in the divine nature and
as such is an expression and experience of deep intimacy with God.

Seen like this, prayer starts with us coming to God and saying, \"I know
you are interceding for XYZ, can I join in too?\" Wow! That sounds like
a recipe for answered prayer.

Approached like this we are far less likely to start telling God what to
do and more inclined to start with, \"Lord, please show me what is on
your heart for this situation.\" This means we need to take time to
listen to God.

A part of the mystery of prayer is that intercession takes time. God
does not tell us why, He just tells us that it does:

Luke 18:7-8 And will not God bring about justice for his chosen ones,
who cry out to him day and night? Will he keep putting them off? I tell
you, he will see that they get justice, and quickly. However, when the
Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?\"

God promises to answer quickly the prayers of those who cry out day and
night. The intercession of Jesus and the Holy Spirit are ongoing and
persistent. As we share in that intercession we also need to share in
persistence until we know we have our answer or we actually see the
answer. This also is a matter hearing God.

Another part of the mystery of intercession is that God looks for human
partners to join Jesus and the Holy Spirit in intercession. What a
privilege to be able to partner with God in this way.

(Romans 8:27) It is about the transforming and healing nature of love,
for intercession is about the expression of our love and our willingness
to share in the transformation and healing of the world that is the will
of God. And it is about patience and perseverance.

Rom 8 assumes that generally we do know what to pray. God puts on our
hearts those things he wants us to join with him in intercession for.
His sheep hear his voice.

 

Solitary

Lengthy

Tiring

Not necessarily with understanding

Not sophisticated. Elijah, Moses

[**1 Corinthians
1:30**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/1-Corinthians/1/30)

Verse Concepts

But by His doing you are in Christ Jesus, who became to us wisdom from
God, and righteousness and sanctification, and redemption,

[**Romans 1:17**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Romans/1/17)

Verse Concepts

For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; as
it is written, \"BUT THE RIGHTEOUS man SHALL LIVE BY FAITH.\"

[**2 Corinthians
5:21**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/2-Corinthians/5/21)

Verse Concepts

He made Him who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf, so that we might
become the righteousness of God in Him.

[**Jeremiah 23:5**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Jeremiah/23/5)

Verse Concepts

\"Behold, the days are coming,\" declares the LORD, \"When I will raise
up for David a righteous Branch; And He will reign as king and act
wisely And do justice and righteousness in the land.

[**Jeremiah 33:15**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Jeremiah/33/15)

Verse Concepts

\'In those days and at that time I will cause a righteous Branch of
David to spring forth; and He shall execute justice and righteousness on
the earth.

[**Jeremiah 23:6**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Jeremiah/23/6)

Verse Concepts

\"In His days Judah will be saved, And Israel will dwell securely; And
this is His name by which He will be called, \'The LORD our
righteousness.\'

[**Jeremiah 33:16**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Jeremiah/33/16)

Verse Concepts

\'In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will dwell in safety;
and this is the name by which she will be called: the LORD is our
righteousness.\'

[**Hebrews 7:2**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Hebrews/7/2)

Verse Concepts

to whom also Abraham apportioned a tenth part of all the spoils, was
first of all, by the translation of his name, king of righteousness, and
then also king of Salem, which is king of peace.

[**Psalm 5:8**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Psalm/5/8)

Verse Concepts

O LORD, lead me in Your righteousness because of my foes; Make Your way
straight before me.

[**Matthew 6:33**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Matthew/6/33)

Verse Concepts

\"But seek first His kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things
will be added to you.

[**Matthew 12:18**](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/Matthew/12/18)

Verse Concepts

\"BEHOLD, MY SERVANT WHOM I HAVE CHOSEN; MY BELOVED IN WHOM MY SOUL is
WELL-PLEASED; I WILL PUT MY SPIRIT UPON HIM, AND HE SHALL PROCLAIM
JUSTICE TO THE GENTILES.
