---
title: Walking in Faith
type: document
---
#  {#section .TOC-Heading}

# Walking {#walking .TOC-Heading}

# In {#in .TOC-Heading}

# Faith  {#faith .TOC-Heading}

# Stephen Dolley {#stephen-dolley .TOC-Heading}

# February 2013 Contents {#february-2013-contents .TOC-Heading}

[Introduction 3](#introduction)

[Prayers of faith please God 4](#prayers-of-faith-please-god)

[Part 1 - The Authentic Gospel 7](#part-1---the-authentic-gospel)

[The power of the gospel in a challenging context
7](#the-power-of-the-gospel-in-a-challenging-context)

[Healing is a part of the authentic Gospel
10](#healing-is-a-part-of-the-authentic-gospel)

[Healing is God's will for Christians
12](#healing-is-gods-will-for-christians)

[Our Superior Covenant Blessings 14](#our-superior-covenant-blessings)

[Part 2 - How Faith works 18](#part-2---how-faith-works)

[God answers prayer in response to faith
18](#god-answers-prayer-in-response-to-faith)

[Unbelief hinders answered prayer 19](#_Toc349392282)

[Faith is Fact 22](#faith-is-fact)

[Faith precedes sight 25](#faith-precedes-sight)

[Part 3 - Finding Faith 27](#part-3---finding-faith)

[Our spirit is not our mind 27](#our-spirit-is-not-our-mind)

[Mental assent is not faith 29](#mental-assent-is-not-faith)

[Hope is not faith 31](#hope-is-not-faith)

[Denial is not faith 32](#denial-is-not-faith)

[Is it God's will? 35](#is-it-gods-will)

[Part 4 - Putting faith to work 38](#part-4---putting-faith-to-work)

[Receiving the Spirit 38](#receiving-the-spirit)

[Faith without works is dead 39](#faith-without-works-is-dead)

[The Fight of Faith 41](#the-fight-of-faith)

[Walking in victory 44](#walking-in-victory)

[Faith brings peace 46](#faith-brings-peace)

[Emulating Abraham 47](#emulating-abraham)

[A Model Prayer for healing 49](#a-model-prayer-for-healing)

# Walking in Faith 

## Introduction

Faith is unwavering belief. In fact there is only one Greek word,
*pistis*, which is sometimes translated belief and sometimes faith. To
have faith is to believe with all your heart. If you are born again then
you are a believer; that is God has given you faith; the ability to
believe Him and His word. This study is about putting our believing into
practice, exercising the faith God has given us for the very purpose He
has given it: that is to believe His word.

"Faith comes from hearing (or reading) the message and the message is
heard through the word of Christ." (**Rom 10:17**) But we should not
mistake faith for intellectual knowledge. We may have God's word in our
mind and say we believe it, because we know we are supposed to believe
it, but we only truly believe when we believe with our hearts. We hear
with our ears, understand with our minds and believe with our hearts,
"for it is with your heart that you believe and are justified" (**Rom
10:10**). It is this last stage that we so often fail to practice.

How can we know if we believe with our heart? Because we act on it. As
James said, "faith without works is dead." When we truly and joyfully
believe God's word we will eagerly and joyfully act on it.

God's word is the most precious earthly possession we have. God has
given us "his very great and precious promises, so that through them you
may participate in the divine nature and escape the corruption in the
world caused by evil desires" (**2Pet 1:4**). If we are to benefit from
these promises and participate in the divine nature, then we must read
and study and meditate on these promises until we believe them with all
our heart and so prove that "all the promises of God find their YES in
him." (**2Cor 1:20 RSV**).

For this reason, "do not let this Book of the Law depart from your
mouth; meditate on it day and night, so that you may be careful to do
everything written in it. Then you will be prosperous and successful."
God assures us "Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do
not be terrified; do not be discouraged, for the LORD your God will be
with you wherever you go." (**Jos 1:8-9**)

We can be fully confident in God's promises, for "God is not a man, that
he should lie, nor a son of man, that he should change his mind. Does he
speak and then not act? Does he promise and not fulfil?"(**Num 23:19**)
No! God assures us "I am watching to see that my word is fulfilled"
(**Jer 1:12**).

## Prayers of faith please God

People always want to know, "What is the secret of your ministry?" I
think the big discovery for me was that God is pleased when I move out
in faith because I am believing His promises. It is this deep conviction
that it pleases God which carries me forward.

The verse most Christians know about pleasing God is:

> "For without faith it is impossible to please God, because anyone who
> comes to him must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who
> earnestly seek him" (**Heb 11:6**).

All through the scriptures we see that it is people putting their trust
in God for His protection and provision that pleases Him. And on the
other hand, it is plain that Jesus was frustrated by the faithlessness
of His disciples:

O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? How
long shall I suffer you? (**Matt 17:17**)

If you want to please Jesus rather than frustrate Him then you need to
be courageous in your faith. The Devil tries to persuade us that God is
a distant and reluctant giver who needs to be "sweetened" by extra
effort at being righteous and cajoled with long and loud prayers. Satan
tells us that the more we pray the more likely God is to hear, and the
more people we get praying the more likely God is to answer. And even if
God does hear us and answer, then the answer will most likely be "No" or
"Wait" rather than "Yes". These are lies we must resist. God has made us
righteous in Christ, loves to hear us pray and is eager to grant our
requests. Paul encourages us to believe that God's answer is "Yes" when
we pray:

> "all the promises of God find their YES in him." (**2Cor 1:20 RSV**).

Jesus assures us that coming to Him with our requests is not tiresome
for Him, but rather it gives Him great pleasure to answer our prayers:

\"But seek the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added to
you. Do not fear, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom. (**Lk 12:31-32**)

But not only does it delight the Father when we come to Him with prayers
of faith, it also glorifies Him:

If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish,
and it will be given you. This is to my Father's glory, that you bear
much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples. (**Jn 15:7-8**)

Jesus takes personal responsibility for our prayers being answered, so
that He may bring glory to the Father:

"And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring
glory to the Father. You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will
do it. (**Jn 14:13-14**)

The motive Jesus gives us for asking is not only the Fathers pleasure,
and the Son's pleasure, but our own pleasure as well:

"I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may
be complete." (**Joh 15:11**)

"In that day you will no longer ask me anything. I tell you the truth,
my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name. Until now you have
not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your
joy will be complete." (**Joh 16:23-24**)

It is clear that Jesus knew it would be difficult for us to accept that
God actually wants to hear and grant our requests. Again and again he
repeated His promise that God would not only answer our prayers, but
actually grant our requests:

> "If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to
> your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good
> gifts to those who ask him!" (**Matt 7:11**)

But there is even more reason than God's pleasure for Him answering our
prayers. The Devil wants people to believe that the Christian faith is
just words and ideas with no present powerful reality; that its all just
"pie in the sky when you die." That until we get to heaven Satan rules
and sin and sickness will remain our masters. But this is not the Gospel
Jesus preached. Jesus announced:

"good news to the poor, freedom for the prisoners, recovery of sight for
the blind and release for the oppressed. To proclaim the year of the
Lord's favour." (**Lk 4:18-19**)

"The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the devil's work."
(**1Jo 3:8**)

Paul was insistent in His preaching that:

> "The kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but **of power**." (**1Co
> 4:20**)

If we want to please God then let us be sure that we proclaim the Gospel
of forgiveness and healing and that we pray in the full confidence that
in boldly asking God for the demonstration of His Kingdom here on earth,
we are pleasing Him and He will certainly grant our requests.

We have inherited precious and very great promises, and God's answer to
them is "Yes". This is ground upon which we stand and from where we will
not be shifted. As Paul said, "Let God be true and every man a liar".
(**Rom 3:4**) Believing God in faith-filled prayers is fun and so much
nicer than struggling with unbelief!

"May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in
him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy
Spirit." (**Ro 15:13**)

## Part 1 - The Authentic Gospel

### The power of the gospel in a challenging context

Life as a Christian in this fallen world is often very challenging. Just
because we have inherited God's precious and very great promises does
not mean that we will not suffer from the godless behaviour of others.
"Stephen, a man full of God's grace and power, did great wonders and
miraculous signs among the people" (**Ac 6:8**) but he was martyred.
Paul likewise was full of grace and power but he suffered greatly from
physical attack at the hands of unbelievers, on at least one occasion
being stoned and left for dead (**Acts 14:19**) Paul addresses the issue
of presenting the gospel in a challenging context at some length in
writing to the Corinthians.

"Therefore, since through God's mercy we have this ministry, we **do not
lose heart**. Rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we
**do not use deception**, **nor do we distort the word of God**. On the
contrary, by **setting forth the truth plainly** we commend ourselves to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. ... But we **have this
treasure in jars of clay** to show that this **all-surpassing power** is
from God and not from us. We are hard pressed on every side, but not
crushed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not abandoned;
struck down, but not destroyed. We always carry **around in our body the
death of Jesus**, so that the **life of Jesus** may also be **revealed
in our body**. For we who are alive are always being given over to death
for Jesus' sake, so that his life may be revealed in our mortal body. So
then, **death is at work in us, but life is at work in you**. It is
written: "I believed; therefore I have spoken." With that same spirit of
faith **we also believe and therefore speak**, because we know that the
one who raised the Lord Jesus from the dead will also raise us with
Jesus and present us with you in his presence. All this is for your
benefit, so that the grace that is reaching more and more people may
cause thanksgiving to overflow to the glory of God. Therefore **we do
not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting away**, yet inwardly we
are **being renewed day by day**. For our light and momentary troubles
are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all. So
**we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen**. For
**what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal**." (**2Co
4:1-18**)

There are a number of key points to notice here.

1.  We must **not lose heart**. Satan will try everything he can to
    discourage us (lit. to take away our courage). This we must
    determine not to allow. Nothing we face can undo the promises of
    God, remove us from His love or disable God from watching over His
    promises to perform them (**Jer 1:12**).

2.  We must **not fake it**. It is tempting to pretend things are better
    than they are or that something has happened when it hasn't. We are
    not as like Jesus as we should be and we understand in part the
    unsearchable wisdom of God. Even Paul made definite plans which
    never worked out (**2Cor 1:17**).

3.  We must **not distort the word of God**. The preachers greatest
    temptation is to distort the word of God to make it say what we want
    it to say for the purpose of our sermon. It is very difficult to
    avoid this completely however careful we are, but we must "Do your
    best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who does
    not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth."
    (**2Tim 2:15**)

4.  We must **set forth the truth plainly**. Our job is to tell the
    truth of the Gospel that God gives us in the scriptures. The truth,
    the whole truth and nothing but the truth. If Jesus says that the
    kingdom is accompanied by healing, that is the Gospel we must
    proclaim. If Jesus says that God acts in response to our faith, that
    is the Gospel we must proclaim. If Jesus says that He Himself is the
    judge of all mankind then we must not hesitate to say so. Jesus
    defines the Gospel, not the sensibilities of our present society.
    Jesus, not Caesar, is Lord of all the earth. If we plainly speak the
    truth delivered to us by Jesus then we "commend ourselves to every
    man's conscience in the sight of God."

5.  **We have this treasure in jars of clay.** The Gospel is amazing --
    we are not! Our frailty and imperfections are not a hindrance to the
    gospel, but on the contrary, they make it all the clearer that it is
    God's power at work and not ours.

6.  The **Gospel shows all-surpassing power**. If there is no power,
    nothing is shown! There is to be a stark contrast between the clay
    vessels and His all-surpassing power. The Gospel is not clay
    vessels, it is the power of God for salvation. (**Rom 1:16**)

7.  **Our** **body displays both the death and the life of Jesus**.
    Jesus died at the hands of sinners. The display of the death of
    Jesus in our bodies is not in sickness and the frailty of old age
    but in the cuts and bruises and broken bones received from others
    because we have stood our ground in proclaiming God's Gospel. Or
    perhaps it is the lost promotion or opportunities because we refuse
    to act corruptly in our work. Nowhere in the bible is sickness
    spoken of as a way of sharing in Christ's sufferings. Jesus was
    never sick. The only way we share in Christ's sufferings is when we
    suffer as a result of our faith. But Paul is clear that it is not
    just the death of Jesus that is displayed in his body, but also the
    life of Jesus. Every time he suffered so terribly in persecutions,
    God raised him up again. His body displayed both the scars of
    persecution and the insuppressible healing life of Jesus -- also
    **in his mortal body**. Our mortal bodies, not just our hearts or
    spirits, are supposed to display the life of Jesus. This is through
    vitality and health, not sickness and decay.

8.  With that same spirit of faith **we believe and therefore speak**.
    Paul is very much in line with Jesus on the issue of faith. We
    believe and therefore speak; not like the west-trained person, we
    *see* therefore we believe therefore we speak. The resurrection of
    Jesus is enough to prove God's power and passion for His word. Faith
    enables us to speak out the truth because of our confidence in God
    before ever we see the thing we are speaking of. That is what faith
    does; it is how faith works.

9.  **We fix our eyes not on what is seen but on what is unseen.**
    Unbelievers and those who have lost heart look at what is seen,
    waiting to see the evidence of what is being hoped for. Believers do
    not look at the present visible realities. Their eyes are fixed on
    Jesus. They see the unseen realities of the promises of God being
    fulfilled. They see the answer to their prayer which is about to
    replace the temporary present visible reality. What is seen is
    temporary. God has changed it in response to my prayer of faith. God
    and His faithfulness is eternal.

Despite the many challenges and considerable difficulties that Paul
faced as he preached the Gospel it is clear that he never shrank from
proclaiming the power of God in the gospel. In writing to the Romans
about his ministry he says:

"I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has
accomplished through me in leading the Gentiles to obey God by what I
have said and done--- by the power of signs and miracles, through the
power of the Spirit." (**Rom 15:18-19**)

### Healing is a part of the authentic Gospel

The miracle of rebirth -- a person being born-again and filled with the
Holy Spirit -- is received by faith. Part of God's provision to help
unbelievers have faith in the Gospel of salvation is to accompany the
preaching of the gospel with signs and wonders -- usually healing
miracles. Healing has a two-fold role in proclaiming the gospel. Firstly
it demonstrates the reality of the salvation that God brings. It is not
just an *invisible* salvation from God's judgement of our sin, it is
also a *visible* salvation from the sickness that has come as a result
of the fall, so that "your faith may not rest on the wisdom of men but
on the power of God" (**1Cor 2:5**).

"The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach
good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim freedom for the
prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to release the oppressed,
to proclaim the year of the Lord's favour." (**Lk 4:18-19**)

But secondly, healing is a demonstration of God's approval of the
message being preached. As one gospel witness put it, "No-one could
perform the miraculous signs you are doing if God were not with him"
(**Jn 3:2**). Jesus repeatedly pointed to the healing miracles as proof
that His message was authentic - people were being healed and delivered
from the power of Satan (**Matt 11:4-5, John 14:11**). Jesus sent the
disciples off with the same message and the same authenticating signs.

When Jesus had called the Twelve together, **he gave them power and
authority** to drive out all demons and **to cure diseases**, and he
sent them out to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the sick. (**Lk
9:1**)

And these signs will accompany those who believe: **In my name** they
will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues; they will pick up
snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not
hurt them at all; **they will place their hands on sick people, and**
**they will get well**. (**Mk 16:17-18**)

The disciples continued to preach the gospel with signs following after
Jesus' ascension.

> "Everyone was filled with awe, and **many wonders and miraculous signs
> were done** by the apostles." (**Ac 2:43**)

"Philip went down to a city in Samaria and proclaimed the Christ there.
When the crowds heard Philip and saw the **miraculous signs** he did,
they all paid close attention to what he said. With shrieks, evil
spirits came out of many, and **many paralytics and cripples were
healed**. So there was great joy in that city." (**Ac 8:5-8**)

"I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has
accomplished through me in leading the Gentiles to obey God by what I
have said and done--- **by the power of signs and miracles**, through
the power of the Spirit." (**Rom 15:18-19**)

> "My message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive
> **words, but with a demonstration of the Spirit's power, so that your
> faith** might not rest on men's wisdom, but on God's power." (**1Co
> 2:4-5**)
>
> "For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but **of power**."
> (**1Co 4:20**)

"This salvation, which was first announced by the Lord, was confirmed to
us by those who heard him. God also testified to it by **signs, wonders
and various miracles**, and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed
according to his will." (**Heb 2:3-4**)

There can be no doubt that it was and is Jesus' intention that signs and
wonders and particularly healing should be a routine part of presenting
the gospel. Freedom from Satan's power does not only relate to spiritual
matters, but also to the curse of the flesh -- sickness. These signs
authenticate the gospel and demonstrate that the Christian faith is not
just about ideas and words, but the power of God to change lives and
deliver people from the devils works.

"The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the devil's work."
(**1Jo 3:8**)

### Healing is God's will for Christians

But healing is not just for authenticating the preaching of the gospel.
It is important to understand that healing and general blessing is God's
declared will for us as Christians. When we pray for healing, depending
on God's word, we are praying in accord with His will and pleasing Him
by our faith. "For without faith it is impossible to please God, because
anyone who comes to him must believe that he exists and that he rewards
those who earnestly seek him" (**Heb 11:6**).

We must not fall for the devils lies that obtaining healing requires
extracting something from God that He is reluctant or uncertain to give.

"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for
us, for it is written: 'Cursed is everyone who is hung on a tree.'" (The
curse of the law was poverty, sickness and death for disobedience.) "He
redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to
the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, so that by faith we might receive the
promise of the Spirit." (**Gal 3:13-14**)

"Surely he took up our infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we
considered him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted. But he
was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities;
the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we
are healed." (**Isa 53:4-5**)

This was to fulfil what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: "He took
up our infirmities and carried our diseases." (**Mt 8:17**)

"He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that we might die
to sins and live for righteousness; by his wounds you have been healed."
(**1Pe 2:24**)

"Is any one of you sick? He should call the elders of the church to pray
over him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer
offered in faith will make the sick person well; the Lord will raise him
up. If he has sinned, he will be forgiven. Therefore confess your sins
to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. The
prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective." (**Jas 5:14-16**)

I have discussed the application of Isa 53:4-5 and its NT quotations (Mt
8:17, 1Pe 2:24) in my notes "Jesus, the Kingdom and Healing, Part 5 -
The Biblical Foundations for healing". Suffice to say here that the
apostles taught and practiced the expectation of divine healing in the
understanding that it was certainly God's will. James does not encourage
prayer for healing because it sometimes helps but because God has
already promised. Notice how he mirrors Jesus' teaching on faith: "the
prayer offered in faith will make the sick person well" -- the condition
upon which healing depends is not God's will, but the faith of the one
praying. In response to a faith-filled prayer, James has no hesitation
in declaring, "the Lord will raise him up" and then, as a bonus, "If he
has sinned, he will be forgiven." Here we see the confident declaration
that God acts in grace towards sinners. Healing and forgiveness is given
to undeserving sinners.

We can confidently declare with James that healing is certainly God's
will and it is obtained by the prayer of faith. In the light of healing
being so much part of Jesus' ministry, and his commission to the
disciples, healing is surely included in the following:

"And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in
you, he who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your
mortal bodies through his Spirit, who lives in you." (**Ro 8:11**)

"He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all---how will
he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?" (**Ro
8:32**)

"We always carry around in our body the death of Jesus, so that the life
of Jesus may also be revealed in our body. For we who are alive are
always being given over to death for Jesus' sake, so that his life may
be revealed in our mortal body." (**2Co 4:10-11**)

We need have no doubt that it is God's will for the life of the risen
Christ to be manifest through health in our mortal bodies.

### Our Superior Covenant Blessings

The New Testament is bold in its proclamation that in Christ we are
brought into a new and better covenant than Moses' covenant of Law which
constituted the Jewish faith.

"But the ministry Jesus has received is as superior to theirs as the
covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, and it is
founded on better promises." (**Heb 8:6**)

The New covenant is even better! Under the Old Covenant God's presence
was hidden away in the temple behind a great thick curtain where only
the high priest could go, and that, only once a year. But now, in
Christ...

"Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit, who is
in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were
bought at a price. Therefore honour God with your body." (**1Co
6:19-20**)

We are God's temple, filled with the Holy Spirit. But note that Paul
does not say our spirit is the temple, but he specifically says "your
**body** is a temple of the Holy Spirit." Paul uses this fact to urge
his readers not to commit sexual sin. But it has wider implications.
Jesus said that His Kingdom was not of this world, but that certainly
did not mean that it has no implications or visibility in this world. On
the contrary, wherever the Kingdom of God was proclaimed its
implications broke into this present physical world -- the sick were
healed and the oppressed set free. So much so that Paul says that
creation is moved to jealousy awaiting the day when "creation itself
will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the
glorious freedom of the children of God" (**Rom 8:17-23**).[^1]

Since we are to honour God with our body we should ensure that healing,
not sickness, reigns in our body. Not only have our spirits been
purchased by Christ, but our bodies have too. We belong to the Kingdom
of God, which is not merely a matter of words, "For the kingdom of God
is not a matter of talk but of power." (**1Co 4:20**)

Although Jesus' kingdom is not of this world, we have been brought into
His kingdom:

"giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the
inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light. For he has rescued us
from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son
he loves," (**Col 1:12-13**)

In this kingdom we know we are under God's blessing and recipients of
His many and great promises (**2Pet 1:4**).

"For no matter how many promises God has made, they are "Yes" in Christ.
And so through him the "Amen" is spoken by us to the glory of God."
(**2Co 1:20**)

One of these promises, which Paul specifically applies to gentile
believers is blessing and long life:

"Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 'Honour
your father and mother'---which is the first commandment with a
promise--- 'that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long
life on the earth.'" (**Eph 6:1-3**)

Paul is confident that we can take these promises given under the old
covenant and know that in Christ, when we bring these promises to God,
His answer is "Yes" and "Amen". Even David under the Old Covenant had
confidence in God for healing:

The LORD will sustain him on his sick-bed and restore him from his bed
of illness. (**Ps 41:3**)

"Praise the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits--- who
forgives all your sins and heals all your diseases" (**Ps 103:2-3**).

So what is the nature of the blessings we have inherited? Abraham's
blessing was threefold in nature:

1\. It was a material or a financial blessing (**Gen 13:2,15; Deut
28:4-12**).

2\. It was a physical blessing (**Gen 13:16; 17:16; Ex 15:26;
23:25-26**).

3\. It was a spiritual blessing (**Gal 3:14**).

These blessings were made conditional for Israel under the Law of Moses:

"if you will diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD your god, and
do that which is right in his eyes, and give heed to his commandments
and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon you
which I put upon the Egyptians; for I am the LORD, your healer." (**Ex
15:26**)

"The LORD will send a blessing on your barns and on everything you put
your hand to. The LORD your God will bless you in the land he is giving
you." (**De 28:8**)

"The LORD will grant you abundant prosperity---in the fruit of your
womb, the young of your livestock and the crops of your ground---in the
land he swore to your forefathers to give you. The LORD will open the
heavens, the storehouse of his bounty, to send rain on your land in
season and to bless all the work of your hands. You will lend to many
nations but will borrow from none. The LORD will make you the head, not
the tail. If you pay attention to the commands of the LORD your God that
I give you this day and carefully follow them, you will always be at the
top, never at the bottom." (**De 28:11-13**)

We have been delivered from the curse of the Law which, until Jesus
came, the people of God were under. We have been made righteous in God's
sight and so now all the promises of God find their "Yes" in Christ.

If you want to see how superior our covenant is and grow strong in your
faith, then I recommend you list all the scriptures in the epistles that
have the expression "in Him," "in Christ," or "in whom," referring to
Jesus (134 of them!). If you make a habit of confessing who you are and
what you have from these scriptures you will become mighty in faith.

## Part 2 - How Faith works

### God answers prayer in response to faith

Jesus made it quite clear that miracles and answered prayer was God's
will for us, yet it depends to a large extent on our faith; our
confident belief that we will get what we ask for.

Jesus taught this very plainly.

"**Everything is possible for him who believes**... I tell you the
truth, if anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the
sea,' and does not doubt in his heart but **believes that what he says
will happen**, it will be done for him. Therefore I tell you, whatever
you ask for in prayer, **believe that you have received it, and it will
be yours**." (**Mk 11:22-24**)

He replied, "Because you have so little faith. I tell you the truth,
**if you have faith** as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this
mountain, 'Move from here to there' and it will move. **Nothing will be
impossible for you**." (**Matt 17:20**)

Jesus replied, "I tell you the truth, if you have faith and do not
doubt, not only can you do what was done to the fig-tree, but also you
can say to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and it will
be done. **If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in
prayer.**" (**Matt 21:21-22**)

It is evident that New Testament believers were taught to have this
confidence.

"He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all---how will
he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?" (**Ro
8:32**)

"This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask
anything according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hears us---whatever we ask---we know that we have what we asked of him."
(**1Jo 5:14-15**)

"Yet you do not have because you do not ask. You ask and do not receive,
because you ask amiss, that you may spend it on your pleasures. (**Jas
4:2-3**)

Jesus healed people who had faith for healing:

"According to your faith will it be done to you" (**Mt 9:29**) --
healing the blind man.

"Everything is possible for him who believes." (**Mk 9:23**) -- casting
out a demon.

"Daughter, your faith has healed you." (**Mk 5:34**) -- woman with flow
of blood

The disciples healed people who had faith for healing:

"In Lystra there sat a man crippled in his feet, who was lame from birth
and had never walked. He listened to Paul as he was speaking. Paul
looked directly at him, **saw that he had faith to be healed** and
called out, "Stand up on your feet!" At that, the man jumped up and
began to walk." (**Ac 14:7-10**)

[]{#_Toc349392282 .anchor}So we see that faith in the one receiving from
God is crucial. This is a big challenge in the developed world where the
primary dependence for health is on the medical profession. But in all
cultures, faith for a visible healing seems to be much more difficult
than for healing aches and pains. It takes love and grace and care when
ministering to a sick person with little faith. We must do all we can to
help them catch our faith, confess the faith they do have and act on
that faith in some way. Our faith in ministering will communicate and be
responded to by those we pray for but in fact love is the most effective
means of helping someone come to faith. A mighty man of faith who just
goes along a line touching people does nothing to nurture the bruised
faith of a hurting soul. But love will fan a flicker of faith into a
bright flame.

### Unbelief hinders answered prayer

Even Jesus was limited in His miracles by the faith or unbelief of those
around Him.

"He could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick
people and heal them. And he was amazed at their lack of faith." (**Mk
6:5-6**)

If even Jesus required faith in those being healed, it is hardly
surprising if that is the case for us also. I think this goes a long way
to explaining why healing is far easier in Africa than it is in the
west. We in the west are taught to be sceptical not believing. On
occasions Jesus took people aside to heal them.

Jesus said, \"Go away. The girl is not dead but asleep.\" But they
laughed at him. After the crowd had been put outside, he went in and
took the girl by the hand, and she got up. (**Matt 9:24-25**) (Healing
Jairus' daughter)

There some people brought to him a man who was deaf and could hardly
talk, and they begged him to place his hand on the man. After **he took
him aside**, away from the crowd, Jesus put his fingers into the man's
ears. Then he spat and touched the man's tongue. (**Mk 7:32-33**)

They came to Bethsaida, and some people brought a blind man and begged
Jesus to touch him. He took the blind man by the hand and **led him
outside the village**. When he had spat on the man's eyes and put his
hands on him, Jesus asked, "Do you see anything?" He looked up and said,
"I see people; they look like trees walking around." Once more Jesus put
his hands on the man's eyes. Then his eyes were opened, his sight was
restored, and he saw everything clearly. Jesus sent him home, saying,
"Don't go into the village." (**Mk 8:22-26**)

It seems likely that the reason Jesus took these two people away from
the crowds was the same as with Jairus' daughter, the atmosphere of
unbelief. This perhaps is also why the blind man was told not to go back
into the village -- he would have been in danger of losing his healing
through their unbelief. Where onlookers are sceptical, prayer should be
conducted in private.

It is not only the faith of the recipient that needs to be protected,
but also the faith of the one ministering. Perhaps this is what happened
when the disciples failed to cast the demon out after the
transfiguration (**Lk 9**). By then they had a track record of success
in dealing with demons (**Lk 9:1, 10:17**). But a father brought them
his son for deliverance and perhaps he was a little dubious about the
disciples praying, preferring the Master Himself. He was certainly
struggling to find faith for he later said to Jesus, "If you can do
anything, take pity on us and help us... help me overcome my unbelief!"
(**Mk 9:22**) It is evident that this poor father was gripped by fear
and unbelief. Perhaps this infected the disciples, for when they saw the
boy convulsing on the ground (as he also did for Jesus) they started to
doubt. However, had the disciples stood fast on the authority that Jesus
had given them, they would have succeeded, for Jesus had given them
authority over "every demon" (**Lk 9:1**). Jesus came to the rescue:

Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed
from that moment. Then the disciples came to Jesus in private and asked,
"Why couldn't we drive it out?" He replied, "Because you have so little
faith. I tell you the truth, if you have faith as small as a mustard
seed, you can say to this mountain, 'Move from here to there' and it
will move. Nothing will be impossible for you." (**Mt 17:18-20**)

The Greek word translated "little" faith can equally be translated
"short-lived" faith, and that seems to be the meaning here. Jesus said
they didn't need big faith, but only faith as small as a mustard seed.
We should not be persuaded by the devil that our faith is too small or
too weak. The problem was not the smallness of their faith but that they
gave up on it. It was short-lived. As soon as they saw the boy fitting
they said, "We cannot do it".

This was the same problem with Peter walking on the water. His faith was
not too small -- he is the only man known to have walked on water other
than Jesus. But his faith was short-lived. When he saw the wind he was
afraid. He let go of his great faith.

Peter got down out of the boat, walked on the water and came towards
Jesus. But when he saw the wind, he was afraid and, beginning to sink,
cried out, "Lord, save me!" Immediately Jesus reached out his hand and
caught him. "You of little (short-lived) faith," he said, "why did you
doubt?" (**Mt 14:29-31**)

Often Jesus intervenes when our faith fails, as in the incidents above.
But in each case Jesus rebuked the disciples for their failed faith
because He wanted them to succeed by their own faith, not His. We must
keep our eyes firmly on Jesus and keep our faith fighting fit. When the
disciples saw the boy fitting and when Peter saw the weather they gave
up believing. It is persevering faith, not great faith, that wins the
victory.

We do not want you to become lazy, but to imitate those who through
faith and patience inherit what has been promised. (**Heb 6:12**)

So do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded. You
need to persevere so that when you have done the will of God, you will
receive what he has promised. (**Heb 10:35-36**)

Remember, unbelief caused Israel to spend 40 years wandering in the
desert when they could have entered the promised land.

### Faith is Fact

We have seen the importance of faith and the danger of unbelief, but how
do we get faith? Where does it come from? Many people seem to think that
faith is just wishful thinking, wanting something to be true or that it
is blind belief in something for which there is no evidence. This is not
the faith of the Bible. Whenever God asks us to have faith He points to
evidence upon which our faith should be based. We have faith in God
doing the "impossible" because He created everything out of nothing
(**Jer 32:17**), we have faith in Jesus' teaching because of the
miracles (**Jn 14:11**), we believe Jesus was the Son of God because God
raised Him from death. It is because faith is evidence based that it is
strengthened through trials. The issue that determines our faith is the
evidence we chose to look at, and the challenge of faith is that the
evidence is so often unseen or at least somewhat removed from the issue
we are confronting.

For instance, when praying for healing the immediate evidence is
sickness and defeat. But we need to look to the less immediate evidence
of previous healings, the promises of God, the evidence for the gospel
in changed lives and the inner witness of the Holy Spirit. Faith is
based on fact, but we have to choose the facts.

We often look to biblical promises as a source of faith, but promises
are the foundation of hope not faith. Facts are the foundation of faith.
For example, in a promise God says, "I will deliver you from all your
fears." This gives us hope. But this hope will not deliver us from fear.
A fearful Christian can memorise and quote this promise a thousand times
without ever being delivered from fear. They may say, "One day God will
deliver me, because I have this promise..." But they may never be free
from fear. This is because God's promises require faith for them to
work, and the promise does not produce faith.

To find faith for this promise we need to look for facts. What reasons
are there to believe that God will perform His promise? What biblical
and historical records show me that God is faithful to perform His
promises? What has God already done to fulfil this promise? To these
facts the Holy Spirit adds His witness in our spirits. Faith transforms
the promise into an experienced reality. "Faith is the substance of
things hoped for" (**Heb 11:1** NKJV).

Some promises have been transformed into fact by what Jesus has done:

"Surely he took up our infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we
considered him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted. But he
was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities;
the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we
are healed." (**Isa 53:4-5**)

Originally this was a promise upon which the hope of a coming messiah
was based. But the promise has been fulfilled in Jesus and so now it has
become a statement of fact. For Christians it is a foundation, not of
hope, but of faith. We do not hope that Jesus took our sins and obtained
our healing, it has been done. The matter is not one of hope but of
faith.

Healing comes to us because of facts, established in history, not
because of hope in future promises. Jesus didn't say "I will heal you if
you pray right and if it is my Fathers will." He said, "All authority in
heaven and earth has been given to me ... Go and place your hands on the
sick and they will get well." (**Matt 28:18, Mk 16:15-18**). The
statement of fact comes first (All authority in heaven and earth has
been given to me) and is the foundation for faith. The promise (the sick
will get well) flows from that fact and gives us hope that our prayers
will be answered. Faith in the fact of Jesus' authority turns that
promise of healing into present reality.

When looking at the promises of scripture, look for the facts that they
are based on. It is those facts that are the foundation of faith in
those promises. Here is another example:

"Is any one of you sick? He should call the elders of the church to pray
over him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer
offered in faith will make the sick person well; the Lord will raise him
up. If he has sinned, he will be forgiven. Therefore confess your sins
to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. The
prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective." (**James
5:14-16**)

(Note in the next verse Elijah, "a man with like passions as us" is
quoted as being righteous. By faith in Christ we are righteous, not
because we are especially sanctified).

Here James makes the promise, on behalf of God, that the Lord will raise
up a sick person in response to the prayer of faith. Note how
confidently the promise is expressed - ... will make ... will raise
...will be. This promised is based on a statement of fact: "The prayer
of a righteous man is powerful and effective." This fact is offered as
the foundation of faith in the promise.

Here are some more examples:

\"But seek the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added to
you. Do not fear, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom. (**Lk 12:31-32**)

If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish,
and it will be given you. This is to my Father's glory, that you bear
much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples. (**Jn 15:7-8**)

Again we see Jesus giving a promise and then making a statement of fact
upon which faith in the promise is founded. If you want to grow strong
in your faith, look to the facts, not just the promises.

### Faith precedes sight

Although faith is indeed founded on fact, that is not all there is to
it. Faith is founded on fact, but then launches out in courage to take
hold of the promise. Most of us are inclined to be like Thomas: the only
facts that matter are the ones our ordinary senses can tell us. We
believe it when we see it. Only when we receive what we are asking God
for do we believe we have it. Jesus rebuked the disciples for their
unbelief and blessed those who believe without first seeing:

Thomas said to them, "**Unless I see** the nail marks in his hands and
put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, **I
will not believe it**." (**Jn 20:25**)

Later Jesus appeared to the Eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them
for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who
had seen him after he had risen. (**Mk 16:14**)

Faith works the other way around. What pleases God is when we believe we
have our petition before we see it.

Then Jesus told him, "Because you have seen me, you have believed;
**blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.**" (**Jn
20:29**)

Although these two quotes are not in the context of prayer, they are
examples of natural unbelief on the one hand and the kind of people God
blesses on the other. Jesus was absolutely clear about the kind of faith
that pleases God:

"I tell you the truth, if anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw
yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt in his heart but **believes
that** **what he says will happen**, it will be done for him. Therefore
I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, **believe that you have
received** it, and **it** **will be yours**." (**Mk 11:23-24**)

Note there are three stages in receiving a request here. The pre-prayer
faith the post-prayer faith and receiving the outcome. Pre-prayer faith
says "What I say will happen". Post-prayer faith says "I have received
it". It is only *after* these two aspects of faith have been played out
that the final stage occurs, "it will be yours."

Genuine faith goes beyond asking. It includes the confident belief that
having prayed God has granted the request. John says the same thing,
several decades later, writing as an old man:

"This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask
anything according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hears us---whatever we ask---we know that we have what we asked of him."
(**1Jo 5:14-15**)

Faith does not look at the visible facts and say, "Oh! God has not
answered" but looks at the faith-facts and says "He who promised is
faithful. I have received what I asked from God." After we have done
this, Jesus says, "It will be done for you. It will be yours."

We should not be surprised that faith works like this. It is how
salvation works. The new creation starts in the spirit by faith and
works its way into our flesh. In the same way healing and other answers
to prayer start in our spirit before being manifest in the flesh. It may
manifest in our flesh immediately or it may take time to develop in our
flesh. We are called to walk by faith, not sight. Abraham had
*not-seeing* faith:

"We live by faith, not by sight." (**2Co 5:7**) (Context is our hope for
resurrection)

"So we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen. For what
is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal." (**2Cor 4:18**)

Abraham is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed---the God
who gives life to the dead and **calls things that are not as though
they were**. Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed and so became
the father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, "So shall
your offspring be." Without weakening in his faith, he faced the fact
that his body was as good as dead---since he was about a hundred years
old---and that Sarah's womb was also dead. Yet he did not waver through
unbelief regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in his faith
and gave glory to God, being fully persuaded that God had power to do
what he had promised." (**Rom 4:17-21**)

You cannot get Abraham's blessing with Thomas' faith ("When I see, then
I will believe.") But if we are born again, we have Abraham's faith;
that is how we got saved.

"Understand, then, that those who believe are children of Abraham."
(**Ga 3:7**)

"If you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the promise." (**Ga 3:29**)

## Part 3 - Finding Faith

### Our spirit is not our mind

We may have some promises and found the facts that God has given to
establish our faith, but that is still not the same as having faith.
Faith resides in our spirits, not in our minds:

"For it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is
with your mouth that you confess and are saved." (**Rom 10:10**)

Scripture speaks of us having a spirit, a soul and a body (**1Thess
5:23**). The soul refers to our mind -- the place of our intellect,
reasoning and emotions. Our spirit is the part that was dead before we
were born again and has the capacity to relate to God and receive
understanding of God's will and faith to believe Him.

"So what shall I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray
with my mind; I will sing with my spirit, but I will also sing with my
mind." (**1Co 14:15**)

The scriptures use heart/inner self/spirit interchangeably, and
mind/soul/natural man interchangeably.

"But the **natural man** does not receive the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him; nor can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned." (**1Co 2:14** NKJV)

"For I delight in the law of God according to the **inward man**."
(**Rom 7:22**)

When we are born again our spirit is renewed, but our minds and bodies
need to be brought into line with our spirit.

"Therefore, I urge you, brothers, in view of God's mercy, to offer
**your bodies** as living sacrifices, holy and pleasing to God---this is
your spiritual act of worship. Do not conform any longer to the pattern
of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of **your mind**. Then
you will be able to test and approve what God's will is---his good,
pleasing and perfect will." (**Rom 12:1-2**)

God works in our spirit, but we have to work that out in our bodies and
minds. We must renew our own minds with God's word. We must offer our
bodies and minds to God as instruments of righteousness (**Rom 6:13**).
When we are born again our spirits are fully redeemed but we await in
confident hope for the total renewal of our minds and bodies when we see
Jesus:

"Dear friends, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not
yet been made known. But we know that when he appears, we shall be like
him, for we shall see him as he is. Everyone who has this hope in him
purifies himself, just as he is pure." (**1Jo 3:3**)

The scriptures use the word heart to refer to our human, God enlivened
spirit, not to our minds. "he is a Jew who is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that **of the heart, in the spirit**, not in the letter;
whose praise is not from men but from God." (**Rom 2:29** NKJV)

The spirit relates to the spiritual realm, the soul to the intellectual
and emotional realm and the body to the physical realm. It is not the
soul/mind that believes for salvation but the spirit; "It is with the
**heart** that we believe..." (**Rom 10:10**). Thus we may often find
that our minds are not renewed and our intellect, emotions and reason is
offended by our faith. If to believe that you have received what you
cannot yet perceive is troublesome -- so be it. We believe with our
spirits, not our souls; with our hearts not our minds. Let it be our
spirit that renews our minds, not our minds that quench our spirit.

Faith, the ability to believe God, is given to us when we are saved. We
can feed our spirit through prayer and meditation on God's word and
through fellowship with other Christians. But recognising that faith
resides in our spirit is important. We are so used to operating out of
our intellect and physical skills that we can imagine that these are
what counts in God's kingdom. But Paul cautions us:

For by the grace given me I say to every one of you: Do not think of
yourself more highly than you ought, but rather think of yourself with
sober judgment, in accordance with the measure of faith God has given
you. (**Rom 12:3**)

This is written in the context of serving within the church. God is
looking for faith, not just faithful service. He wants to promote faith
and have leaders who "by faith and patience inherit the promises" (**Heb
6:12**). So we are to consider the health of our faith, not the strength
of our skills in assessing ourselves and the same assessment must be
made when selecting leaders. Thank God for our skills and intellect, but
our spirit is not our mind.

### Mental assent is not faith 

Having seen that faith resides in our spirit not our minds, we can see
that it is wrong to look to our understanding for faith:

"Trust in the LORD with **all your heart** and lean **not on your** own
**understanding**; in all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make
your paths straight. Do **not be wise in your own eyes**; fear the LORD
and shun evil." (**Pr 3:5-7**)

We may say we believe that the bible is true and that the Gospels are a
reliable record of Jesus words and ministry. But that is not faith. The
problem is that we use "the faith" to refer to the body of doctrine
which comprises Christian beliefs. This should not be confused with the
faith that is required to please God and obtain answered prayer.

Salvation comes to us when we believe Jesus with our heart:

"For it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is
with your mouth that you confess and are saved." (**Rom 10:10**)

We believe and then demonstrate our faith by confessing our salvation.
God responds by giving His Spirit to make us into a new creation. After
believing we enter into rest; faith comes first.

"Now faith is being sure of what we hope for and certain of what we do
not see." (**Heb 11:1**)

"Now we who have believed enter that rest" (**Heb 4:3**)

"Let God be true, and every man a liar." (**Rom 3:4**)

Just as saving faith belongs to our hearts so also does on-going faith
for answered prayer. If you say, "I believe the bible, but I do not have
my petition" then you have mental assent not faith. In fact, you are
fooling yourself that believe. You may want to believe, but in fact you
don't. If you did believe you would be saying, "I have my answer." The
mind says, "I believe it but I don't understand why I haven't got it."
The heart says "I have it, even though I can't see it."

"I tell you the truth, if anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw
yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt **in his heart but believes**
that what he says will happen, it will be done for him." (**Mk 11:23**)

If you are eager to confess to other believers (not doubters) that you
have the thing you are believing for, then you can be sure you have
faith in your heart, "for out of the overflow of his heart his mouth
speaks" (**Lk 6:45**). But if you are afraid to confess it except to God
then you do not have faith, but hope. Keep praying and meditating on the
scriptures and speaking truth until you have faith. Faith grows as we
give glory to God (**Rom 4:20**).

### Hope is not faith

Many people have hope and think it is faith, but hope and faith are
different things with different purposes and must not be confused. Paul
said, "now these three remain: faith, hope and love" (**1Cor 13:13**).
Hope is a vision of a desirable but not yet obtained future:

"For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is no hope at
all. Who hopes for what he already has? But if we hope for what we do
not yet have, we wait for it patiently." (**Rom 8:24-25**)

Hope always relates to future things, and often refers to uncertain
things, such as when Paul says, "I hope to visit you." However, there is
a special kind of hope in the bible; a sure and certain hope. It is the
assured hope of one day receiving all that we have inherited in Christ.
It is part of the gospel message and is inspired by the Holy Spirit:

We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, firm and secure. It enters
the inner sanctuary behind the curtain. (**Heb 6:19**)

May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him,
so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
(**Rom 15:13**)

Faith has similarities with hope because it also relates to a desirable
but not yet visible future, but hope is not faith. A Christian may know
that the bible teaches the assured hope of resurrection yet may not have
assurance for themselves. They may have hope but not faith. Faith adds
certainty to that hope:

"Now faith is being sure of what we hope for and certain of what we do
not see." (**Heb 11:1**)

Faith, therefore, adds assurance or certainty to hope. In the context of
prayer, faith has an even more specific role: it adds *present*
certainty. In prayer, faith takes a future hope and makes it a present
reality.

anyone ... who believes that what he says will happen, it will be done
for him. ...whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have
received it, and it will be yours." (**Mk 11:23-24**)

"...if you have faith and do not doubt ... it will be done. If you
believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer." (**Matt
21:21-22**)

"If you have faith as small as a mustard seed... it will move. Nothing
will be impossible for you.\"(**Matt 17:20**)

Jesus said that He would answer the prayer of faith, not the prayer of
hope. There is no assurance that we will receive answers to our hopes in
prayer. "Jesus I ask you to do such and such because I really need help
here" is a prayer of hope not faith. A vision of a desirable future is
presented to God in this prayer, but that is not how Jesus instructed us
to pray. He said, "Whatever you ask for in prayer, **believe that you
have received it, and it will be yours."** Faith says, "I am sure and
certain of what I hope for. Jesus has heard and granted my request. I
have my answer."

Salvation is by faith, not hope (**Eph 2:8**). This is well understood.
A person hoping for salvation would be urged to put their faith in
Christ, so that they could stop hoping and make it real. Faith is the
realisation of things hoped for. We should approach prayer in exactly
the same way. Hoping God will answer your prayer is not faith. Faith is
knowing God has answered. Prayer is answered in response to faith, not
hope.

### Denial is not faith 

Although faith looks at unseen evidence, it does not deny our
experienced reality. Faith does not deny that symptoms are real, that
pain is real, that sin is real or that the devil is real. When Jesus
asked the blind man if he could see, he wanted a report of the
experienced facts, not a "confession of faith":

When he had spat on the man's eyes and put his hands on him, Jesus
asked, \"Do you see anything?\" He looked up and said, \"I see people;
they look like trees walking around.\" (**Mk 8:23**)

It is interesting to note the way Jesus asked his question. He could
have made a "faith confession" by asking, "What can you see?" rather
than "Can you see anything?" But it seems Jesus was not bothered by such
detail. However, the blind man's experience was a challenge to Jesus'
faith because he could not see clearly. The disciples might have given
up, but Jesus ministered healing again. Faith does not deny experienced
reality but neither does it allow those experiences to hold our
attention.

"Let us **fix our eyes on Jesus**, the author and perfecter of our
faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its
shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God." (**Heb
12:2**)

Abraham is held up as our example of faith:

"He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed---the God who
gives life to the dead and calls things that are not as though they
were. **Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed** and so became the
father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, \"So shall your
offspring be.\" Without weakening in his faith, he **faced the fact that
his body was as good as dead**---since he was about a hundred years
old---and that Sarah's womb was also dead. Yet he **did not waver
through unbelief** regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in
his faith and gave glory to God, being fully persuaded that God had
power to do what he had promised." (**Rom 4:17-21**)

Abraham is an example of faith precisely because he hoped against all
hope. Abraham didn't deny the fact but "faced the fact" that present
reality did not match the promise he was believing. It is not unbelief
or "negative confession" to say, "No. I am not yet healed. I still have
the pain." But it is unbelief to say, "God has not granted my healing"
or "the prayer didn't work". Faith does not consider the problem, but
considers Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of our faith (**Heb. 12:2**).
We grow strong in our faith as we give glory to God, not as we give
attention and 'glory' to our as yet unresolved problem.

Rather than giving attention to the problem, focus your mind on what
Jesus has done for you and what He is doing for you as your High Priest.
Jesus is doing something for you right now. He is seated at the right
hand of God right now making intercession for you (**Heb. 7:25**).

"Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has gone through the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold firmly to the faith we
profess." (**Heb 4:14**)

"My son, pay attention to what I say; listen closely to my words. **Do
not let them out of your sight**, keep them within your heart; for they
are **life** to those who find them and **health** to a man's whole
body." (**Prov 4:20-22**)

"The Spirit gives life; the flesh counts for nothing. The words I have
spoken to you are spirit and they are life." (**Jn 6:63**)

Faith keeps God's life-giving words in our thoughts and lets them hold
our attention. God has given us His Word to get our thinking
straightened out, so that we won't be ignorant and so our believing will
be right.

"So I tell you this, and insist on it in the Lord, that you must no
longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking. They
are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God
because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their
hearts." (**Eph 4:17-18**)

God has said, "Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you." So we
say with confidence, "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid. What
can man do to me?" (**Heb 13:5-6**)

### Is it God's will?

"Ah!" someone will say, "But what if it isn't God's will for you to have
what you ask for." To which I answer, somewhat simplistically, "But in
my bible, I have it written that Jesus said it *was* God's will to do
whatever we ask in believing prayer. So why don't you concentrate on
doing what Jesus said, and let God worry about His part of the bargain?"

"Ask and it will be given to you; For everyone who asks receives;"
(**Matt 7:7-8**) (this sentiment is repeated six times by Jesus in this
passage, and it is also recorded by Luke).

"If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to
those who ask him!" (**Matt 7:11**)

He replied, "Because you have so little faith. I tell you the truth, if
you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain,
'Move from here to there' and it will move. Nothing will be impossible
for you." (**Matt 17:20**)

"Again, I tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything you
ask for, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven." (**Mt 18:19**)

Jesus replied, "I tell you the truth, if you have faith and do not
doubt, not only can you do what was done to the fig-tree, but also you
can say to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and it will
be done. If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in
prayer." (**Matt 21:21-22**)

"Everything is possible for him who believes... I tell you the truth, if
anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and
does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen,
it will be done for him. Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in
prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours." (**Mk
11:22-24**)

"And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring
glory to the Father. You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will
do it. (**Jn 14:13-14**)

"If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish,
and it will be given you." (**Jn 15:7**)

"The Father will give you whatever you ask in my name." (**Jn 15:16**)

"In that day you will no longer ask me anything. I tell you the truth,
my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name. Until now you have
not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your
joy will be complete." (**Joh 16:23-24**)

Jesus does not seem to be the least bit worried about what we might ask
for. Any one of the many recorded encouragements to ask could have been
qualified with "if it is God's will", but not a single such condition is
found in the gospel record among nearly 30 such promises. Let us be
honest. If a person says "But what if it isn't God's will for you to
have what you ask for" then you can hope that they will take care to ask
according to God's will. I do not see asking for the wrong things as the
main problem that Jesus encountered. As it happens, we do read of Jesus
correcting someone who asked Him for something slightly dubious.

Then the mother of Zebedee's sons came to Jesus with her sons and,
kneeling down, asked a favour of him. "What is it you want?" he asked.
She said, "Grant that one of these two sons of mine may sit at your
right and the other at your left in your kingdom." "You don't know what
you are asking," Jesus said to them. "Can you drink the cup I am going
to drink?" "We can," they answered. Jesus said to them, "You will indeed
drink from my cup, but to sit at my right or left is not for me to
grant. These places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by
my Father." When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the
two brothers. (**Mt 20:20-24**)

Notice that although the disciples were indignant about this request,
Jesus was not. There is not a hint of reprimand in Jesus' response.
Indeed, He gives what He has the authority to give in meeting the
request. Not once do we read of Jesus refusing a request or reprimanding
someone for not asking in accordance with God's will. The problem Jesus
confronted was not presumptuous faith but no faith. Jesus did not say
"When the Son of Man comes will he find people believing God for the
wrong things" but "Will He find faith on earth" (**Lk 18:8**) So I say
again. You concentrate on asking God in believing prayer and let God
worry about fulfilling His promise to grant your request.

It is evident that the apostles felt the need to add some qualification
to these promises:

"Dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence
before God and receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his
commands and do what pleases him." (**1Jo 3:21-22**)

"This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask
anything according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hears us---whatever we ask---we know that we have what we asked of him."
(**1Jo 5:14-15**)

"Yet you do not have because you do not ask. You ask and do not receive,
because you ask amiss, that you may spend it on your pleasures." (**Jas
4:2-3**)

"The prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective." (**Jas
5:16**)

"Husbands, in the same way be considerate as you live with your wives,
and treat them with respect as the weaker partner and as heirs with you
of the gracious gift of life, so that nothing will hinder your prayers."
(**1Pe 3:7**)

Clearly a spirit filled believer who believes Jesus and takes His word
seriously is never going to knowingly ask for something contrary to
God's will. We can confidently come to God in faith-filled prayer for
the abundance of His good gifts which the Father promises to give to
those who ask him. The issue is not God's will, but our asking.

On the occasions when we really do not know what God's will is, we can
confidently use Jesus's words from Gethsemane, "Not my will but yours be
done." But when praying in accordance with God's declared will we do not
need to use such words. We should pray single-mindedly for the result
confident in Jesus' many promises to grant our requests.

## Part 4 - Putting faith to work

### Receiving the Spirit

As we have seen, God answers our prayers of faith. Faith says, "I have
got what I asked for" and confesses the fact even before seeing the
reality of the answer. The same is true when it comes to receiving the
Holy Spirit. We have a promise backed up by a fact:

"God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of the
fact. Exalted to the right hand of God, he has received from the Father
the promised Holy Spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear."
(**Ac 2:32-33**)

When praying for the gift of the Holy Spirit, we do not need to ask God
to give. We are not dependant on a promise but a *fact*; that God has
poured out His Spirit for believers. We see this in Acts where believers
were not asked 'has God given you the Spirit?' but 'have you received
the Spirit?' It is up to us to receive:

He asked them, "Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?" They
answered, "No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit."
(**Ac 19:2**)

God has given the Spirit, we must receive Him by faith, just as we
receive salvation by faith. Then we must act on our faith by speaking in
tongues. The Spirit does not speak in tongues, we do, as the Spirit
prompts.

"All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in
other tongues as the Spirit enabled them." (**Ac 2:4**)

"The circumcised believers who had come with Peter were astonished that
the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles.
For they heard them speaking in tongues and praising God. (**Ac
10:45-46**)

"When Paul placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and
they spoke in tongues and prophesied." (**Ac 19:6**)

So here also we see that faith must be accompanied by action. Speaking
in tongues is how we demonstrate our faith in God's promise to give the
Spirit. If we act in demonstration of our faith by speaking in tongues,
then God will give us "utterance".

Having been filled with the Holy Spirit, we also, like Stephen, need to
be filled with faith and power, then we will be able to obey Jesus'
command to preach the Gospel with confirming signs and wonders:

"Now Stephen, a man full of God's grace and power, did great wonders and
miraculous signs among the people." (**Ac 6:8**)

### Faith without works is dead

James says that faith without works is dead.

"What good is it, my brothers, if a man claims to have faith but has no
deeds? Can such faith save him?" (**Jas 2:14**)

"But someone will say, "You have faith; I have deeds." Show me your
faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by what I do. You
believe that there is one God. Good! Even the demons believe that---and
shudder. You foolish man, do you want evidence that faith without deeds
is useless? Was not our ancestor Abraham considered righteous for what
he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? You see that his
faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made
complete by what he did." (**Jas 2:18-22**)

James is principally talking about evidence of faith in our moral
behaviour. But he takes Abraham offering Isaac as an example and thus
shows that the principal has a wider application. Like Abraham, we must
confess and act on our faith before we receive evidence. If you want to
wait for evidence before you confess it, you're wrong. You've got the
cart before the horse. You'll never inherit the promises that way. You
have to believe the promises in God's Word are true for you, confess
them for yourself; then you possess them.

But what does it say? "The word is near you; it is in your **mouth** and
in your heart," that is, the word of faith we are proclaiming: That if
you confess with your **mouth**, "Jesus is Lord," and believe in your
heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. For it is
with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your
**mouth** that you confess and are saved (**Rom 10:8-10**).

Thus we see that the speaking out about one's salvation is a required
part of receiving salvation. Confession in the heart to God is not
enough. Public confession is part of the package. The same is true of
any other prayer of faith:

It is written: "I believed; therefore I have spoken." With that same
spirit of faith we also believe and therefore speak (**2Cor 4:13**).

Nowhere in the bible do we ever find faith receiving its answer without
action. Heart faith is not enough. It must be expressed somehow, either
by a physical act or through a spoken word and with thanksgiving to God.
If you cannot demonstrate your faith by action, you should confess it to
other people. It needs to go beyond the secrecy of you and God. It is
not that speaking it releases some magic but that hope is so easily
mistaken for faith. Acting on our faith or telling another person what
we have obtained by faith helps to reveal our true faith.

"Whoever acknowledges me before men, I will also acknowledge him before
my Father in heaven. But whoever disowns me before men, I will disown
him before my Father in heaven." (**Mt 10:32-33**)

"Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and **puts them into
practice** is like a wise man who built his house on the rock." (**Mt
7:24**)

Faith without works is dead! Action without faith will fail, and faith
without action will fail. The people believed and shouted before the
walls of Jericho came down (**Josh 6:20**). Shouting afterwards is easy!
Faith does so before it sees. If you don't act, you did not have faith.
Or put positively, if you have faith, you will act. Who would not act if
they knew they had received their request? Give thanks after your prayer
and before you see the evidence of the answer:

"Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and
petition, **with thanksgiving**, present your requests to God. And the
peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts
and your minds in Christ Jesus." (**Php 4:6-7**)

Jesus said something which seems very unfair:

"Whoever has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. Whoever
does not have, even what he has will be taken from him." (**Mt 13:12**)

Jesus said this because it is true. It is how faith works. Faith begets
faith, doubt begets doubt. What you sow you reap. Those who have faith
will get more, but those who doubt will lose what little faith they
have. Whenever the storms of sickness or other challenge come along, one
standing on the word of God will overcome and be strengthened in their
faith, whilst the one who hears but does not truly believe and confess
them will be overcome and what little faith they had will be lost. The
only way to increase faith is to act on the faith you already have.

### The Fight of Faith

Faith comes through our study of the word and through hearing sound
teaching. It is likely to be contested by circumstance and physical
evidence, in which case we must fight the fight of faith. We insist on
the truth of the word and deny the authority of any contrary evidence,
acting on and speaking the truth, not the lie. We must hold fast the
confession of our faith.

"Let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is
faithful." (**Heb 10:23**)

"Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life to
which you were called when you made your good confession in the presence
of many witnesses." (**1Ti 6:12**)

The fight of faith takes place in our spirits and minds. All kinds of
'reasonable' arguments arise in our minds saying that we do not have
what God promised, that our prayer has not been answered, that Satan has
prevailed over us. We have to take every such thought captive and
declare instead the truth of Christ.

"The weapons we fight with are not the weapons of the world. On the
contrary, they have divine power to demolish strongholds. We demolish
arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge
of God, and we **take captive every thought** to make it **obedient to
Christ**." (**2Co 10:4-5**)

There is an American proverb: "You can't keep the birds from flying over
your head, but you can keep them from building a nest in your hair!" You
can refuse to dwell on Satan's accusations. You can also refuse to put
evil thoughts into action. The best thing to do is to laugh at the devil
because he is a liar. Cultivate the habit of thinking big things
according to the Word and acting out your faith.

"Submit yourselves, then, to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee
from you." (**Jas 4:7**)

"Do not merely listen to the word, and so deceive yourselves. Do what it
says." (**Jas 1:22**)

Refuse fear and anxiety which undermine faith. Don't think about
negative things, even if they are true! Think about the good truth of
God's word and rejoice in that.

"Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is
right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable---if
anything is excellent or praiseworthy---think about such things."
(**Phil 4:8**)

In the face of trials, we should turn the tables on Satan, rejoicing in
the fact that trials serve to strengthen our faith, not undermine it.

"**Consider it pure joy**, my brothers, whenever you face trials of many
kinds, because you know that the testing of your faith develops
perseverance. Perseverance must finish its work so **that you may** be
mature and complete, **not lacking anything**. If any of you lacks
wisdom, he should ask God, who gives generously to all without finding
fault, and it will be given to him. But when he asks, **he must believe
and not doubt**, because he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown
and tossed by the wind. That man should not think he will receive
anything from the Lord; he is a double-minded man, unstable in all he
does." (**Jas 1:2-8**)

The weapons and armour of our warfare are faith in God and in His word.
Memorising scripture is one of our best defences, allowing us to recall
truth whenever we face attack.

"Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. Put on the full
armour of God so that you can take your stand against the devil's
schemes. For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against
the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark
world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
Therefore put on the full armour of God, so that when the day of evil
comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done
everything, to stand. Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled
round your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place, and
with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of
peace. In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which
you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one. Take the
helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God. And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers
and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for
all the saints." (**Eph 6:10-18**)

So let us be bold in our counter attack against the lies of Satan.

"I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me" (**Phil. 4:13**)

"The LORD is my light and my salvation---whom shall I fear? The LORD is
the stronghold of my life---of whom shall I be afraid?" (**Ps 27:1**)

As the Scripture says, "Anyone who trusts in him will never be put to
shame." (**Rom 10:11**)

Christians are often very quickly offended if they hear another
Christian swear, but don't even seem to notice when they speak words of
doubt and unbelief . I think the Gospels show us that Jesus would
consider speaking words of doubt and unbelief to be an offence far worse
than swearing! Doubt and fear come from the devil and we should have
nothing to do with them. We must stand against them with God's word.

### Walking in victory

Our inheritance in Jesus is not sickness and defeat but resurrection
victory:

"For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into
the kingdom of the Son he loves," (**Col 1:13**)

We should be careful not to "own" what is not ours; not to speak of
troubles as if they were ours, but rather as impostors with no right of
abode or access. We should not endlessly confess our sin and failures
but confess God's total forgiveness and grace. Let us confess our
righteousness in His sight because of Jesus. Neither should we confess
our sickness, but rather our inheritance of healing in Christ. If only
we believed that almighty God is IN US! What victory we would walk in.

"But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ." (**1Co 15:57**)

"For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one
man, how much more will those who receive God's abundant provision of
grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one
man, Jesus Christ." (**Rom 5:17**)

"You, dear children, are from God and have overcome them, because the
one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world." (**1Jo
4:4**)

God has given promises to strengthen us against fear, which is so often
Satan's weapon against us.

"So do not fear, for I am with you; do not be dismayed, for I am your
God. I will strengthen you and help you; I will uphold you with my
righteous right hand." (**Isa 41:10**)

"What, then, shall we say in response to this? If God is for us, who can
be against us?" (**Rom 8:31**)

However it is important to recognise that the Holy Spirit is our helper,
not our doer. He doesn't force himself upon us, but prompts and
encourages and empowers our actions. We must be willing and courageous
and act in the faith that God will empower us.

Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. (**Eph 6:10**)

"Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you." So we say with
confidence, "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man
do to me?" (**Heb 13:5-6**)

"I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power
through his Spirit in your inner being, so that Christ may dwell in your
hearts through faith." (**Eph 3:16-17**)

"I have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. In this
world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world."
(**Joh 16:33**)

We may suffer many troubles in this life because of hostility to God,
but in our spirits, souls and bodies we can walk in victory. Victory
over sin, sickness and fear comes through faith as we believe and act in
demonstration of our confidence in God.

Many people who receive divine healing get sick again with the same
sickness. Their healing does not persist. Jesus spoke about this:

When an evil spirit comes out of a man, it goes through arid places
seeking rest and does not find it. Then it says, 'I will return to the
house I left.' When it arrives, it finds the house swept clean and put
in order. Then it goes and takes seven other spirits more wicked than
itself, and they go in and live there. And the final condition of that
man is worse than the first. (**Lu 11:24-26**)

The reason a Christian gets sick in the first place is because of an
illegal intrusion of the devil. Healing prayer can drive out the
sickness, but if that person does not close the door to re-invasion by
maintaining their confidence in God's promises, then Satan can easily
re-establish his former position. This is a serious problem because it
undermines faith for future healing. It is therefore essential that
healing is followed by repentance, the infilling of the Holy Spirit and
instruction on spiritual warfare. When Jesus healed He frequently said,
"Go and sin no more".

"You, dear children, are from God and have overcome them, because the
one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world." (**1Jo
4:4**)

This simple scripture can help to strengthen a person's faith against
re-infection. If any symptoms reappear, we can declare, "God is in me!
There is no room for the devil as well." And so kick him out!

### Faith brings peace

Fellowship with Jesus is the mother of faith and joy. It is the source
of victory.

"Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free." (**Joh
8:32**)

"I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may
be complete." (**Joh 15:11**)

"God, who has called you into fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, is faithful." (**1Co 1:9**)

Faith brings us to a place of rest in believing. It is not an inner
struggle. We may have to fight the devils accusations and other peoples
doubts, but faith is assurance, and assurance, by definition, brings
peace.

"The mind of sinful man is death, but the mind controlled by the Spirit
is life and peace;" (**Ro 8:6**)

"May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in
him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy
Spirit." (**Ro 15:13**)

"Now we who have believed enter that rest" (**Heb 4:3**)

"For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit," (**Ro 14:17**)

He said to her, "Daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be
freed from your suffering." (**Mr 5:34**)

"Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and
petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God. And the peace
of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and
your minds in Christ Jesus." (**Phil 4:6-7**)

Faith is evidenced by peace and joy in our hearts. If our hearts do not
condemn us, we receive whatever we ask:

Dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before
God and receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his commands
and do what pleases him. (**1Jn 3:20-21**)

### Emulating Abraham

As we have already seen, Abraham is held up as our example of faith. He
put into practice the things we have learnt in this study:

"He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed---the God who
gives life to the dead and calls things that are not as though they
were. Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed and so became the
father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, \"So shall your
offspring be.\" Without weakening in his faith, he faced the fact that
his body was as good as dead---since he was about a hundred years
old---and that Sarah's womb was also dead. Yet he did not waver through
unbelief regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in his faith
and gave glory to God, being fully persuaded that God had power to do
what he had promised." (**Rom 4:17-21**)

Can you see how he took the following steps that we have looked at:

1.  Faith is Fact: Consider God's statements of fact upon which your
    faith is based.

2.  Believe God's word.

3.  Faith precedes sight: Call things that are not as though they were
    (i.e. ignore the contradictory evidence)

4.  Give glory to God for His answer.

The healing of the woman with a flow of blood is another example of
faith in action. It is particularly instructive because the healing took
place without Jesus Himself taking any action. In that respect, it is
similar to our own healing. We take action to obtain healing because we
know what Jesus has already done for us:

"And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve
years. She had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and
had spent all she had, yet instead of getting better she grew worse.
When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and
**touched his cloak**, because she thought, "If I just touch his
clothes, **I will be healed**." Immediately **her bleeding stopped** and
she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering. At once
Jesus realised that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the
crowd and asked, "Who touched my clothes?" "You see the people crowding
against you," his disciples answered, "and yet you can ask, 'Who touched
me?'" But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it. Then the
woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and,
trembling with fear, **told him the whole truth**." (**Mk 5:25-33**)

We see the same steps in her obtaining healing:

1.  Her faith was based on fact: She had heard about Jesus healing.

2.  She believed He would heal her. ("I will be healed")

3.  She acted on her faith. (She touched His cloak)

4.  She gave glory to God for His answer (She told him the whole truth)

This is the pattern of faith that gains victory over the flesh, the
world, and the devil:

**Facts-\>Faith-\>Action-\>Evidence**

There are many other examples of this pattern of faith. It is how David
slaughtered Goliath, Joshua defeated Jericho and the prodigal son was
received back by his father.

### A Model Prayer for healing

I am very hesitant about offering a model prayer for healing knowing how
susceptible we are to thinking that if we get the words right, God will
answer. But the following account of a prayer made by an elderly
missionary is, I think, quite instructive.

"Father, this woman is Your child. She belongs to you. It is not right
that the devil should dominate her through sickness and disease. So we
thank You, Father, because You have made provision for her deliverance.
You laid her sickness and her diseases on Jesus, for it is written, 'He
took our infirmities, and bore our sicknesses'" Then this retired
missionary exercised his authority over the devil based on the Word of
God. He said, "Now, Satan, you're going to have to take your hands off
this woman's body because this body is a temple of the Holy Ghost. It
belongs to God and you've got no right to trespass on God's property.
Now we demand that you remove yourself from God's property." Then the
retired missionary talked to the woman. He said, "Now, Sister, Satan has
oppressed your body with sickness, but God has made provision for your
deliverance. Your body is a temple of the Holy Ghost, and you are
commanded to glorify God in your body and in your spirit. Can God be
glorified in your body by the devil dominating it? No, therefore, you
stand against this sickness with me, and together we will demand that
Satan stop trespassing on God's property."

The three parties involved in sickness and healing, God, Satan and the
sick person, are addressed with simple confident faith in accordance
with God's word. This is not a formula, but an example of a prayer of
faith which is in line with Jesus own ministry.

[^1]: Paul acknowledges that we experience present suffering with Christ
    because of the wickedness of the fallen world we live in and we wait
    patiently for the fullness of redemption, when we will receive
    renewed bodies (see 1Cor 15:35ff for Pauls teaching about
    resurrection bodies). For this he says "we hope for what we do not
    yet have." But note that it is specifically the final resurrection
    redemption of our bodies which we do not yet have. Paul certainly
    did not believe we have to wait for healing. He practiced healing as
    an essential part of proclaiming and demonstrating the gospel (Ro
    15:18-19)**.**
