---
title: What should the church to look like?
type: document
translationKey: What should the church to look like?
geometry: margin=2cm
geometry: a4paper
---

The church is depicted by Paul as the Body of Christ -- each part joined
in love and functioning in relation to the whole to embody Jesus in our
communities (1 Cor 12). But generations of church practices have
entrenched \"church\" as a producer / consumer relationship between the
leaders and the congregation. In addition our consumer society has
encouraged people to view church as a service-provider resulting in
pick-and-choose and take-it-or-leave-it attitudes.

The relevance of the church has also been curtailed by reducing the
Gospel to the Cross instead of preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom that
Jesus told us to proclaim.

For several years I have been saying that Jesus never told us to run
churches, but to love one another and go and make disciples. In Jesus\'
ministry and that of the early church, both of these commands were
worked out in deeply relational community. As a consequence we have been
promoting Growth Groups as a very effective means of loving and making
disciples.

I now want to address a fundamental question: what did Jesus intend the
church to look like?

## Troubling Traditions

Jesus said, "You have a fine way of setting aside the commands of God in
order to observe your own traditions!" Mark 7:9. We are often blind to
our own traditions and jump to defend them when challenged.

Many styles of church have been tried, including house church, Cell
Church, Alternative Worship, Seeker-Friendly, concert-style, night-club
style, Messy Church, Caf√© Church and more. Each of these has started
with the concept of a worship service and tried to find more culturally
relevant ways of doing worship in the hope that non-Christians might be
persuaded to come and see.

But even Christians struggle with church! In recent weeks I have had
Christians from three different generations tell me that church is not
working for them.

Have we simply been following the traditions of men? Who said that a
church gathering should be a worship service? What would happen if we
allowed ourselves to completely reimagine church from the start? That is
extremely difficult because the word \"church\" has generations of
meaning behind it. So let\'s not even talk about church. Let\'s ban that
word for the sake of this exercise, and instead let\'s talk about
Missional Communities.

## Missional Communities

We have already established our starting point in two important
discoveries:

1.  Jesus never told us to run church services; He sent us to make
    obedient disciples.

2.  The Gospel Jesus preached was depicted by His life, not His death.

When we come to the Gospels to learn from Jesus about what a Missional
Community might look like, we are struck by the observation that God the
Father is the Great Missionary. This is not a story of men finding God,
but of God seeking and drawing men to Himself. The whole bible proclaims
this from cover to cover. That shows us that a Missional Community sees
God and the world differently:

1.  God is seen as the Missional God, reaching into our communities in
    manifold ways to set them free in His Kingdom.

2.  Our mission, therefore, is to help our friends recognize how God is
    at work in their lives and to help them cooperate with Him.

So if God is the Missionary and our role is to \"water\" what God is
doing, how do we do that? Jesus makes this very clear: live a Kingdom
life and proclaim the presence of the Kingdom. In other words, love one
another -- and love those who do not yet know Jesus -- and invite them
to share in God\'s kingdom too. Therefore a Missional Community sees
themselves differently:

1.  The starting point is the formation of a culturally appropriate
    community, rather than a *service*. Sharing all of our lives in
    transparent honesty is our act of worship.

2.  Our mission is to transform our society through demonstrating the
    Kingdom of God.

## Gathering round a Breaking Bread Meal

It\'s not too difficult to create small communities -- our wider
communities probably have many already. In our village we have groups
for craft, singing, running, walking, dancing, photography, book-swap,
reading, cinema, football \... the list goes on. Some of these groups
are run by churches or individual Christians. But how do we create a
Missional Community?

I feel that centring a Missional Community around the Breaking of Bread
is important for several reasons:

-   Jesus commanded it at the Last Supper.

-   As a remembrance of His death it reminds us that God is the Father,
    sending His Son to us. And as the Father reached out to us in Jesus,
    so we also are to be an outward reaching community. Through us God
    reaches out to others in love.

-   As a proper meal, rather than a token meal, it emphasises to us that
    we need to feed on Him, just like we feed on the bread. We must eat
    and drink Him so He lives in and through us.

-   The meal has a past, present and future aspect. It looks back to the
    Cross; celebrates His presence with us now; and looks forward to the
    fullness of the Kingdom.

But here is a most important point that we tend to miss. Jesus said he
would not eat again with his disciples until the Kingdom had come (Luke
22:18). And yet after the resurrection Jesus is recorded as eating again
and again with his disciples.

Jesus was making the point that the Kingdom has now come. Our meal is
therefore about the presence of the Kingdom. We live out the Kingdom and
invite others to take part.

Although traditionally the Breaking of Bread has been restricted to
believers, there is no suggestion in the Gospels or the letters that the
church should close its doors to unbelievers when sharing this meal.
Indeed, the early church viewed the Breaking of Bread as central to
mission. in In 362AD Julian II, Emperor of Rome, wrote this about the
Christians: \"These impious Galileans not only feed their own poor,
***but ours also***; welcoming them into their agapae (their Breaking
Bread meal), they attract them, as children are attracted, with cakes.\"
Pagans were invited to share in the Breaking of Bread meals and thereby
came to faith. The agapae meal was a celebration ***and demonstration***
of God reaching out to a broken world in Jesus and through His death
establishing the means of forgiveness and restoration.

Simple churches around the world have proved how effective a shared meal
is at creating community with not-yet-believers and make it an essential
part of their gatherings.

## What does it look like?

So if we start with the Jesus-ordained ingredient of the Breaking Bread
meal, what else can we say about a Missional Community? Well I think we
can agree it needs to be:

-   Enjoyable to the extent that people are enthusiastic about inviting
    others to come.

-   Jesus centred so that conversations about Jesus are easy to
    initiate.

-   Non-denominational, non-threatening and non-churchy as far as
    people\'s pre-conceptions are concerned.

-   Grow organically.

Beyond that, we will only discover what a Missional Community looks like
by starting one. This is our suggested starting point:

-   Build community around sharing a simple breaking-bread meal followed
    by optional small-group activities (see later).

-   Use a minimal liturgical structure sufficient to make it clear what
    the meal represents to believers.

-   Encourage all to take part in short small-group discussion of a
    short passage of scripture before the meal.

-   Avoid unnecessary religious elements, such as singing and preaching
    and pretence.

## What it Might Become

You can have many different small missional communities in a community,
each serving different demographic needs. They might meet once or twice
a month -- or more often - (not necessarily on a Sunday) in homes or
public places.

There would be a mix of Christian and not yet Christian people. During
the breaking-bread meal people would be sharing their news and also
their concerns and needs. After the meal, several small groups could
form to take things deeper. Possible small groups might include:

-   A Parenting Course

-   A Growth Group

-   Prayer for healing or some other specific need.

-   Help with budgeting or managing debt.

-   Questions about the Bible or Christianity that people are struggling
    with.

-   Practical help or advice.

-   Learning and singing worship songs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Agnostics / Atheists discussion group

## What about our Existing Congregations?

If Missional Communities prove to be effective then we must give them
priority over \"normal church\" and they must become our new \"normal\".
We will probably want to find ways of gathering missional communities
together from time to time, as Jesus leads -- but not to build up our
own kingdom.

## The Kingdom of God in Community

Missional communities reject the producer / consumer view of church and
embrace the call to live as a family joined in Christ. This family is
where the Kingdom is expressed most clearly as family support is offered
and relationship issues worked out rather than being ignored. The
success of a Missional Community depends upon strong and transparent
loving relationships. The real focus is on the relationships rather than
the gatherings; gatherings support relationship, not the other way
round. But Missional Communities are not inward-focussed; their
community extends to their non-Christian friends and seeks to include
them. Indeed, for some Christians in the community, their deepest and
most transparent relationships might be with non-Christians.

Because of the central importance of relationships, the maximum size of
a Missional Community is typically around 40 people.

## So what does \"church\" look like?

Church is a Kingdom-centred way of life, not a meeting. It is a body
functioning with Jesus as the head. It\'s leadership and direction
depends upon listening to and hearing Jesus, not following our program.
It is loving and supporting and disciple-making. It is salt and light in
its wider community. It is God\'s Kingdom evident on earth. It\'s a
place where Jesus would go un-noticed because there are so many doing
what Jesus does; a place where Jesus would want to be as a participant.
