---
type: document
translationKey: Recalibrating our Definitions
title: Recalibrating our Definitions
---
# Recalibrating our Definitions.

I believe we have grown so accustomed to services as we know them, that
we need to question our assumptions and recalibrate our understanding of
many basic concepts. For instance,

-   What is worship?

-   What is discipleship?

-   What is the church?

-   Why should Christians meet together?

-   What is our mission?

My brief answers to these questions are:

\"Worship is a significant conversation with God.\" By this I mean it
has an impact on our obedience to Jesus, and it is a two-way
conversation where we also listen and hear. Praying and singing may be
helpful, but they are *not* essential ingredients of worship.

\"Discipleship is a Spirit filled person listening to and being obedient
to Jesus that results in bearing fruit that endures to eternal life.\"
It is not learning about Jesus, or living a good and moral life, or
faithfully attending church.

\"The church is literally the *assembly*, which derives from the
governing body of a community. It is not simply a Christian version of
the synagogue; it has a different purpose. It is a meeting of the
disciples of Jesus in a locality for the purpose of transforming its
wider community.\"

\"Christians should meet together to love one another and encourage one
another to love and good works. This should often / usually be in the
context of sharing a meal in celebration of His death and resurrection,
the presence of His Kingdom and the promise of His return in glory.\"

\"Our mission is to make obedient disciples throughout the nations.\"
Jesus never tried to recruit members; rather He put people off with His
outrageous claims and warnings. We are not called to get people to come
to church, or believe in God, or live moral lives. There are many who
live close to Jesus, but nevertheless do not belong to Him. (Luke
13:26-27 \"You will say \'We ate and drank in your presence and you
taught in our streets\' But I will answer, \'I do not know you. Depart
from me\...\'\" The only measure of discipleship that Jesus uses is
fruitful obedience. We do terrible harm to the mission of the church by
watering down Jesus\' words and making Him acceptable.

We pursue our mission by healing and deliverance and declaration the
presence of the Kingdom of God to those who do not know Him. We are to
go after lost sheep (those closest to us who are not obedient disciples)
and to the dark places in our communities.\" Our mission is *not* to run
church services!
