---
title: What is love
type: document
---
# What is love?

CS Lewis distinguishes between giving-love and need-love; we love God
because we need Him, but He loves us out of giving rather than need. He
also distinguishes between need-pleasure and appreciative-pleasure. We
enjoy a glass of water only when we are thirsty (need-pleasure) but we
enjoy the scent of a flower without having a need to smell flowers.
Need-pleasures are self-centred and passing (my need was met), whereas
appreciation pleasures are object-centred and enduring (that is
beautiful). These pleasures naturally lead to expressions of love, we
love those things that meet our needs, and we love those things whose
beauty delights us.

I define giving-love as having a concern for, and taking delight in the
wellbeing and joy of another. It is a love that gives us pleasure, or it
is not love at all, but that pleasure is indirect. For instance I spent
an evening listening to Stravinsky's Firebird with an elderly friend.
His wife said she wasn't interested in that sort of music and said she
would come and pick him up later . When she came to pick him up, I said
to her, "Ruth, just listen to the first few bars of this music". She
humoured us and sat down. 20 minutes later she sat in silent spellbound
wonder. I had already enjoyed the music myself that evening, but it gave
me enormous added pleasure to see how much Ruth was moved by it. That
pleasure was itself two-fold. Partly I was pleased because I love the
music and feel it deserves peoples appreciation, but my greater pleasure
was because I loved Ruth and was so thrilled to see her evident wonder
and enjoyment.

Need-love is easy to understand -- I love Mirrlees because she cooks
nice meals for me. Appreciative love is slightly more difficult; why
should I love the smell of sweet-peas? Well, I don't know but the
appreciation of beauty enriches our lives. And so I also love Mirrlees
because of her qualities that I appreciate, such as her kindness. Both
of these loves are real and important and valid, but they are selfish;
neither are giving-loves. The test of giving love is "do I delight in
Mirrlees' pleasure?"

This is important for our receiving God's love. His love is not
need-love. He does not need worshippers. God does not need us to
reassure Him that He is the almighty.

God's love is giving-love. As Paul says to the Romans, **^ "^**He who
did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all---how will he not
also, along with him, graciously give us all things?" God loves us to
know His forgiveness and be free from guilt and shame and fear. He loves
to see our lives free from the corrupting effects of lies and deceit.
**"**It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then,
and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery."

God loves our wellbeing; He loves our joy. Paul urges the Corinthian's
not to **receive God's grace in vain.** There is a temptation to believe
that even after we have come to God in repentance for forgiveness, that
we still owe Him a debt of remorse and self-loathing. Yet when someone
has seriously wronged us and then comes in grovelling remorse it is most
irritating if they will not simply accept our forgiveness and move on.
To keep begging for forgiveness is tantamount to saying "I do not
believe you have forgiven me." It is an insult to our integrity and our
ability to forgive. This is one aspect of receiving God's grace in vain.

Paul lived with the knowledge that he had actively persecuted Christ's
brothers, having them arrested and thrown into prison, bringing terror
and misery to countless innocent families. He participated in the murder
of Stephen and perhaps in the death of other believers. He was arrested
by Jesus Himself and convicted of his sin against God and His people.
When Judas realised how he had sinned against Jesus, he went and hung
himself; but Paul became a passionate advocate for the gospel. Was Judas
beyond forgiveness? I don't think so. Jesus forgave those who nailed Him
to the cross. Although Paul was keenly aware that he had once been an
enemy of God, he was clearly not preoccupied with that thought. He had
received forgiveness from God, and that set Him free from the paralysing
feelings of guilt and shame. No doubt from time to time he did or said
things he later regretted and needed to receive further forgiveness from
God. But Paul clearly lived with a clear conscience, untroubled by his
previous sins and failings -- and not because he didn't care about them,
but because He received the grace of God in forgiveness. Paul's appeal
to the Corinthians was that they should not receive the grace of God in
vain. Have we learnt to fully receive God's love and forgiveness? Do we
live with guilt and shame for past failings that continue to plague our
thoughts? The gracious forgiveness of God has been demonstrated on the
cross and promised to us in scripture, but is received by faith.

It is not always easy to receive God's forgiveness; sometimes we cannot
truly believe God has totally forgiven us and that he does not want us
to carry a burden of guilt. \...

**What motivated Paul to withstand such difficulties in ministry?**

In the course of pursuing some great goal many people endure incredible
hardship. Mountaineers and polar explorers for example. Most of us have
endure hardship of some sort for the prospect of future gain -- studying
for exams for example. Or scrimping and saving to get together the money
for a deposit on our first home. Paul describes some of the hardships he
has endured for the sake of his ministry, "so that our ministry will not
be discredited" he says.

Paul is motivated by two loves; firstly an appreciation for the Love of
God; the desire to see as many people as possible share in that
appreciation because God's love is so beautiful. And secondly his love
for people. Paul loved the Corinthians as his own children. He loved
their wellbeing and joy, and knew that Jesus was the true means to the
greatest joys. He is not driven by need-love. Paul does not need the
adulation of men; far from it! He rebukes those who seek to please men
rather than God.

Our own relationship with God is firstly and primarily one of need-love.
We need His love and forgiveness. We need His assurances and care. We
are children in need of His care. Many Psalms are written from this
perspective, crying out for God's deliverance.

But as we get to know Him we begin to appreciate Him for who He is. We
love His faithfulness, we delight in His righteousness, we wonder at His
glory. The more we appreciate Him the more we will want to make Him
known. This leads us to delight in worshipping Him, singing songs that
exalt His wondrous qualities. We see this appreciative love expressed in
many of the Psalms.

But neither our need of God nor our appreciation of His qualities
necessitates a personal relationship with God; one in which giving love
is a two-way experience. Although God has no need of us, we can
nevertheless give Him pleasure. The scriptures tell us again and again
that God takes pleasure in the righteous, in those who put their trust
in Him, in those who take risks of faith in Him. He has no pleasure in
those who shrink back in fear. We can please God through our trust in
Him, and we can take delight in God's pleasure. These things are the
essence of a personal relationship with God. It goes beyond simple need
and appreciation and includes a joyful motivation to give God pleasure.
