---
title: Be Joyful
type: document
---
# Be Joyful!

**2Sa 6:14** "David danced before the LORD with all his might,"

**Psalm 5:11** But let all who take refuge in you rejoice; let them ever
sing for joy, and spread your protection over them, that those who love
your name may exult in you

**Psalm 9:2** I will be glad and exult in you; I will sing praise to
your name, O Most High.

**Ps 16:11** "You have made known to me the path of life; you will fill
me with joy in your presence, with eternal pleasures at your right
hand."

**Psalm 21:6** For you make him most blessed forever; you make him glad
with the joy of your presence.

**Ps 47:1** "Clap your hands, all you nations; shout to God with cries
of joy."

**Psalm 64:10** Let the righteous one rejoice in the Lord and take
refuge in him! Let all the upright in heart exult!

**Psalm 71:23** My lips will shout for joy when I sing praise to you---
I whom you have delivered.

**Psalm 92:4-5** For you make me glad by your deeds, Lord; I sing for
joy at what your hands have done. How great are your works, Lord, how
profound your thoughts!

**Ps 100:1-2** "Shout for joy to the LORD, all the earth. Worship the
LORD with gladness; come before him with joyful songs."

**Ps 126:2-3** "Our mouths were filled with laughter, our tongues with
songs of joy. Then it was said among the nations, \"The LORD has done
great things for them.\" The LORD has done great things for us, and we
are filled with joy."

**Ps 149:3** "Let them praise his name with dancing and make music to
him with tambourine and harp."

**Ne 8:10** Nehemiah said, \"Go and enjoy choice food and sweet drinks,
and send some to those who have nothing prepared. This day is sacred to
our Lord. Do not grieve, for the joy of the LORD is your strength."

**Isa 9:3** "You have enlarged the nation and increased their joy; they
rejoice before you as people rejoice at the harvest, as men rejoice when
dividing the plunder."

**Isaiah 12:6** Shout aloud and sing for joy, people of Zion, for great
is the Holy One of Israel among you.\"

**Isaiah 35:10** and the ransomed of the LORD will return. They will
enter Zion with singing; everlasting joy will crown their heads.
Gladness and joy will overtake them, and sorrow and sighing will flee
away.

**Isa 61:3** "and provide for those who grieve in Zion---to bestow on
them a crown of beauty instead of ashes, the oil of gladness instead of
mourning, and a garment of praise instead of a spirit of despair. They
will be called oaks of righteousness, a planting of the LORD for the
display of his splendour."

**Isa 61:7** "Instead of their shame my people will receive a double
portion, and instead of disgrace they will rejoice in their inheritance;
and so they will inherit a double portion in their land, and everlasting
joy will be theirs."

**1Ch 16:27** "Splendour and majesty are before him; strength and joy in
his dwelling-place."

**Zephaniah 3:17** The Lord your God is in your midst, a mighty one who
will save; he will rejoice over you with gladness; he will quiet you by
his love; he will exult over you with loud singing.

**Lu 6:23** "Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your
reward in heaven. For that is how their fathers treated the prophets."

**Lu 10:21** At that time Jesus, full of joy through the Holy Spirit,
said, \"I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have
hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to
little children. Yes, Father, for this was your good pleasure."

**John 16:22** So with you: Now is your time of grief, but I will see
you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.

**Ac 13:52** "And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy
Spirit."

**Ro 14:17** "For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and
drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit,"

**Romans 15:13** May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as
you trust in him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the
Holy Spirit.

**Ga 5:22** "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, goodness, faithfulness,"

**Philippians 4:4** Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say,
Rejoice.

**1Th 1:6** "You became imitators of us and of the Lord; in spite of
severe suffering, you welcomed the message with the joy given by the
Holy Spirit."

**Hebrews 12:2** For the joy set before him he endured the cross,
scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.

**1Pe 1:8** "Though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though
you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an
inexpressible and glorious joy,"
