---
title: The 38 Commandments of Jesus
type: document
---
# The 38 Commands of Jesus 

## Relationship with God

### You must be born again

\"You must be born again.\" (John 3:7)

### Remain in Me and I will remain in you

\"Remain in me, and I will remain in you. No branch can bear fruit by
itself; it must remain in the vine. Neither can you bear fruit unless
you remain in me.\" (John 15:4)

### This, then, is how you should pray

This, then, is how you should pray: \'Our Father in heaven, hallowed be
your name, your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in
heaven. Give us today our daily bread. Forgive us our debts, as we also
have forgiven our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from the evil one.\' (Matt 6:9-15)

### Do this in Remembrance of Me

\"And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them,
saying, \'This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me.\'
In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, \'This cup is
the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.\'\" (Luke
22:19-20)

## Love One Another

### Love One Another

\"My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you.\" (John
15:12)

### Wash One Another\'s Feet

\"Now that I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also
should wash one another\'s feet.\" (John 13:14)

### Do not Despise Childlike Believers

\"See that you do not look down on one of these little ones. For I tell
you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in
heaven.\" (Matt 18:10)

### Do not Oppose Other Believers

\"Teacher,\" said John, \"we saw a man driving out demons in your name
and we told him to stop, because he was not one of us.\" "Do not stop
him,\" Jesus said. \"No one who does a miracle in my name can in the
next moment say anything bad about me, for whoever is not against us is
for us.\" (Mark 9:38-40)

### Be Merciful

\"Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.\" (Luke 6:36)

### Do not Judge

\"Do not judge, or you too will be judged. For in the same way you judge
others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be
measured to you.\" (Matt 7:1-2)

### Forgive -- as you are forgiven

\"And when you stand praying, if you hold anything against anyone,
forgive him, so that your Father in heaven may forgive you your sins.\"
But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father who is in heaven
forgive your sins.\" (Mark 11:25-26)

### Care for Those in Distress

\"Then the King will say to those on his right, \'Come, you who are
blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for
you since the creation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me
something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I
was a stranger and you invited me in, I needed clothes and you clothed
me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to
visit me.\" (Matt 25:34-36)

### Be a Good Samaritan

\"The expert in the law replied, \'The one who had mercy on him.\' Jesus
told him, \"Go and do likewise.\" (Luke 10:30-37) (In reference to the
\"Good Samaritan\")

### Love Your Enemies

\"You have heard that it was said, \'Love your neighbour and hate your
enemy.\' But I tell you: Love your enemies and pray for those who
persecute you, that you may be sons of your Father in heaven. He causes
his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the
righteous and the unrighteous.\" (Matt 5:43-45)

### Turn the other Cheek

\"You have heard that it was said, \'Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.'
But I tell you, Do not resist an evil person. If someone strikes you on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also.\" (Matt 5:38-39)

### Go the extra mile

\"And if someone wants to sue you and take your tunic, let him have your
cloak as well. If someone forces you to go one mile, go with him two
miles. Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one
who wants to borrow from you.\" (Matt 5:40-42)

### Settle Disputes Between Believers in this Manner\...

\"If your brother sins against you, go and show him his fault, just
between the two of you. If he listens to you, you have won your brother
over. But if he will not listen, take one or two others along, so that
\'every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three
witnesses.\' If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church; and
if he refuses to listen even to the church, treat him as you would a
pagan or a tax collector.\"(Matt 18:15-17)

### Settle matters quickly with your adversary

\"Settle matters quickly with your adversary who is taking you to court.
Do it while you are still with him on the way, or he may hand you over
to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and you
may be thrown into prison.\" (Matt 5:25)

## Trust God

### Put God First

\"But seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added to you.\" (Matt 6:33)

### Do not Store up Treasures on Earth

\"Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust
destroy, and where thieves break in and steal. But store up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and
where thieves do not break in and steal. For where your treasure is,
there your heart will be also.\" (Matt 6:19-21)

### Do not Worry about Your Needs

\"Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat
or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more
important than food, and the body more important than clothes? Look at
the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns,
and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable
than they?\" (Matt 6:25-26)

### Do not Worry about Tomorrow

\"Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about
itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.\" (Matt 6:34)

### Ask, Seek, and Knock

\"Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the
door will be opened to you.\" (Matt 7:7)

### Have Complete Faith in God

\"Have faith in God,\" Jesus answered. \"I tell you the truth, if anyone
says to this mountain, \'Go, throw yourself into the sea,\' and does not
doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will
be done for him. Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer,
believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.\" (Mark
11:22-24)

## Holiness

### Get rid of whatever causes you to sin

\"If your right eye causes you to sin, gouge it out and throw it away.
It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole
body to be thrown into hell. And if your right hand causes you to sin,
cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one part of
your body than for your whole body to go into hell.\"(Matt 5:29-30)

### Do Not Swear at All

\"But I tell you, Do not swear at all: either by heaven, for it is
God\'s throne; or by the earth, for it is his footstool; or by
Jerusalem, for it is the city of the Great King. And do not swear by
your head, for you cannot make even one hair white or black. Simply let
your \'Yes\' be \'Yes,\' and your \'No,\' \'No\'; anything beyond this
comes from the evil one.\" (Matt 5:34-37)

### Enter Through the Narrow Gate

\"Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the
road that leads to destruction, and many enter through it. But small is
the gate and narrow the road that leads to life, and only a few find
it.\" (Matt 7:13-14)

### You Must be Ready

\"You also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour
when you do not expect him.\" (Luke 12:40)

### Watch out for false prophets

\"Watch out for false prophets. They come to you in sheep\'s clothing,
but inwardly they are ferocious wolves.\" (Matt 7:15)

### Guard what is Sacred

\"Do not give dogs what is sacred; do not throw your pearls to pigs. If
you do, they may trample them under their feet, and then turn and tear
you to pieces.\" (Matt 7:6)

## Witness

### Let your light shine before men

\"You are the light of the world. A city on a hill cannot be hidden. \"
In the same way, let your light shine before men, that they may see your
good deeds and praise your Father in heaven.\" (Matt 5:14;16)

### Heal the Sick

\"He called his twelve disciples to him and gave them authority to drive
out evil spirits and to heal every disease and sickness.\" (Matt 10:1)
\"Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those who have leprosy, drive
out demons. Freely you have received, freely give.\" (Matt 10:8)

### Go and Make Disciples 

\"Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching
them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I am with you
always, to the very end of the age.\" (Matt 28:19-20)

## Obey God without fanfare

### Obey What I Command

\"If you love me, you will obey what I command.\" (John 14:15)

### Give to Please God, Not to be Seen

\"Be careful not to do your \'acts of righteousness\' before men, to be
seen by them. If you do, you will have no reward from your Father in
heaven.\" (Matt 6:1)

### Pray Privately, Not to be Seen of Men

\"And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by
men. I tell you the truth, they have received their reward in full. But
when you pray, go into your room, close the door and pray to your
Father, who is unseen. Then your Father, who sees what is done in
secret, will reward you. And when you pray, do not keep on babbling like
pagans, for they think they will be heard because of their many words.\"
(Matt 6:5-7)

### Fast Without Fanfare

\"When you fast, do not look sombre as the hypocrites do, for they
disfigure their faces to show men they are fasting. I tell you the
truth, they have received their reward in full.\" (Matt 6:16)

### Do not Exalt Yourself

\"But you are not to be called \'Rabbi,\' for you have only one Master
and you are all brothers. And do not call anyone on earth \'father,\'
for you have one Father, and he is in heaven. Nor are you to be called
\'teacher,\' for you have one Teacher, the Christ. The greatest among
you will be your servant. For whoever exalts himself will be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.\" (Matt 23:8-12)
