---
title: The Gospel of the Kingdom for Gentiles
type: document
---
# The Gospel of the Kingdom

### Grasping for hope

We all hope for a better future. That is why we educate ourselves. It is
why people want to go to university. It is why people vote in elections.
It is why we take risks. Without hope we would just give up and die!

Every culture offers its own pathway to a better future. In traditional
rural cultures it often involves ancestor worship and sacrificial
offerings. In tribal cultures it often involves obtaining a dominant
position over competing tribes. In religious cultures it usually
involves some sort of self-cleansing and penance. In secular cultures it
often involves the accumulation of wealth and the domination of others.

The point is that there are many different ways in which people seek to
improve their lives. God is also interested in this. He created us,
loves us and wants our lives to be fruitful and blessed. He wants your
life to be fruitful and blessed.

### Frustrated by Sin

But our lives are made difficult because of sin. The sin of countless
generations before us has created great injustice and imbalance in the
world. The sin of our governments has resulted in broken economies and
widespread injustice. Sin in our communities results in people being
cheated and ill-treated. Sin in our families results in arguments and
fights and deep emotional pain. We have individually and corporately
messed up our world and our own lives.

So where do we turn for help and guidance? We look to our own reason --
trying to make sense of the situation and work out a way forward. We
turn to our family and friends for advice. We turn to our culture and
traditions for wisdom. We look both inward and outward to the things we
can perceive and try to make the best choice we can. But God is not far
from any of us. And He sees what we can never see. He also sees the
big-picture; how our actions affect those around us and those who will
come after us.

### Light from Above

The Good News of the Gospel is that God has broken into our dark and
confused world by sending His Son Jesus to live and die as a man. He was
rejected by many and suffered terrible injustice, resulting in His
murder by being nailed to a tree and left to die. But God raised Him up
from death and Jesus is now alive and reigns over the Kingdom of God all
over the world today.

We can choose to continue to try and find our own way, as we always have
done, or we can put our trust in God and follow Jesus' way. But we
cannot pick and choose. Jesus does not just offer a few other choices we
can pick from. If we want the light of Jesus in our lives we need to
turn our backs on all other voices and listen only to Jesus.

That is Jesus' call -- "Repent; turn around. Believe the Truth that is
Jesus Christ. Turn your back on all other claims of wisdom and light and
trust only in Jesus as your Light."

### Becoming a child of God

God welcomes all who put their whole trust in Jesus. We need to become
God's children through being baptised in water and baptised in the Holy
Spirit. In the water we die to our old way of living and thinking and
all the sin and curses of our past are cut off forever. Then we rise up
as a new person, God's holy child, and receive the transforming and
empowering Holy Spirit. He becomes our teacher and guide.

### The Narrow Way

Living in the Light of Jesus is counter-cultural. It often leads to
great blessing but it also leads to great challenges; Jesus was rejected
and killed! This is not the easy path, but it is God's way of love which
brings freedom and healing to our broken world. God dwells in His
children to enable them to bring Jesus' love and healing to others. He
sends us to love one another and to go and make disciples...
