---
title: The Gospel of the Kingdom for Jews
type: document
---
# The Gospel of the Kingdom

## The Gospel for the Jews

Throughout human existence, people have mostly either worshipped false
gods, or tried to ignore God, but it seems that God has always revealed
Himself to a few people. Then, about 4000 years ago, God revealed
Himself to a man called Abraham and gave him a promise, that God would
bless him and through Abraham, God would bless the whole world. The
story of what happed to Abraham and his descendants is very interesting
and important because God used them to create a story which shows us how
we too can come to know God and share in the promise God gave to Abraham
- that God will bless us and make us a blessing to others.

He told Abraham to leave his home and travel to a distant land which God
would give to his descendants - that was the land we now call Israel.
Abraham had a son, Isaac and Isaac had a son called Jacob and Jacob had
twelve sons who became the fathers of the twelve tribes of Israel. Then
because of a great famine the whole family moved to Egypt where there
was fertile farmland, and there they became a great people. But because
of their number and prosperity they were enslaved by the Egyptians.

So God revealed Himself to a man called Moses and used him to lead the
people out of slavery. Their enslavement had been a gradual process
which they had adjusted to and many were prepared to accept in return
for the security it gave them. Moses had quite a task to persuade his
fellow Israelites that they should leave all this behind and risk an
uncertain journey to an unknown destination for the promise of a better
future.

God planned for this historical physical journey to be a picture of the
spiritual journey each of us is invited to make from living in the
\"kingdom\" of the world to becoming one of God\'s people, living here
on earth as part of God\'s Kingdom.

Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt, pursued by the Egyptian army. God
miraculously parted the Red Sea to let the Israelites through, but the
Egyptian army was drowned. By going through the Red Sea the people were
cut off from their past and their slavery was ended. From there, Moses
led the people into the land God had originally promised to Abraham.

Although the people were now free from the Egyptians and living in their
own land, they were not free from the corruption of their human nature.
The strong and powerful took advantage of the poor and weak. Selfishness
and greed played their familiar part and for the most part they ignored
God and lived lives that were just as messed up and unhappy as they had
been in Egypt. The people had many religious practices but none of these
impressed God. God wanted His people to love one another and provide
justice for the oppressed and mercy for those who had messed up but
wanted to reform their lives.

Throughout the years since Abraham, God had sent prophets saying that
one day God would send a special messenger who would give us a new way
of knowing God. That messenger was Jesus, and the new way of knowing God
was through having our hearts changed by God. With changed hearts
obedience to God\'s good ways would become natural for us and we would
have the courage to stand against wrong. Wonderful as this message
sounded, it was not going to be well received by the rich and powerful
leaders of Israel.

Jesus\' life and His message would mirror the journey of the Israelites
fleeing Egypt. Jesus preached very boldly about things which made people
feel very uncomfortable - and they still do. Jesus said that this world
was under the influence of the Devil; He called it the \"Kingdom of
Darkness\" and contrasted it with God\'s kingdom, the \"Kingdom of
Light\". Jesus came as Light from God to show people the way out of
Darkness into God\'s Kingdom, of Light, just like Moses had led Israel
out of slavery in Egypt into the Promised Land. Jesus also spoke often
about a coming day of Justice, like a global court-hearing when everyone
of us, whether living or long-since dead, would be called to answer to
God for how we have lived our lives. Jesus said that those who love
Truth need have no fear of coming to Jesus and becoming part of God\'s
Kingdom, but those who want to hide their lives from God would flee His
presence. Jesus made it very clear that it was not religious people that
pleased God, but obedient people; people who believed that Jesus was God
Himself come as a man, and who allowed Jesus the King to influence and
direct their lives for the blessing of others. It was through Jesus and
those who become His disciples today that God would fulfil the original
promise He made to Abraham; that God would bless him and through him
bless the whole world. And that, in a nut-shell is what it means to be a
Christian; to become one of God\'s people through obedience to Jesus, so
that we can receive God\'s abundant blessings and share those blessings
with those around us.

However, the religious leaders of Jesus\' day did not like the way He
was challenging their cosy self-serving hypocrisy and they staged a
kangaroo court with trumped-up charges and had Jesus executed by nailing
Him to a cross. But God raised Jesus from the grave and after meeting
with more than 500 people over a period of 40 days, Jesus was taken into
God\'s presence where He lives and reigns as the King of the Kingdom of
God.

We have nearly, but not quite reached the end of the story. The prophets
had said that when God\'s special messenger came, He would also change
people\'s hearts. Jesus said this would happen after He returned to
Heaven when God would pour the Holy Spirit into the hearts of those who
lived with Jesus as their King. This happened to the first disciples,
transforming them from fearful nobodies into bold witnesses to the
resurrection of Jesus and of His power to heal and transform lives.
Sadly, countless people have misrepresented Jesus by turning his message
into one of joyless religious observance. Nevertheless, the transforming
power of the Holy Spirit is still available for all who want to turn
from the kingdom of Darkness to God\'s Kingdom of Light. Jesus said that
in order to live in God\'s light we must leave behind our old way of
living (just like the Israelites leaving Egypt), put our trust in Jesus
(like the Israelites following Moses), be baptised in water (like the
Israelites passing through the Red Sea) and then be baptized in the Holy
Spirit. He promises then to set us free from our past (like the Egyptian
Army drowning in the Red Sea) and lead us by His empowering Spirit into
an adventure with Jesus (like the Israelites entering the Promised
Land), where we learn to live like Him and do what He did.
