---
title: Elders and Apostles
translationKey: Elders and Apostles
type: document
---
### Elders and Apostles

NT church leadership consists of Jesus the head, elders/leaders and the
saints, who are the foot-soldiers of the church.

Paul instructed Titus to appoint elders over the churches in his care.
It is the New Testament norm for local churches to have one or more
elders to care for it. But Paul warns not to appoint novice believers
who lack maturity in their faith. The reason is that young believers are
often eager to become elders because of the esteem it gives them. But
Jesus shows us the true heart of an elder:

"But when He saw the multitudes, He was moved with compassion for them,
because they were weary and scattered, like sheep having no shepherd."
(Matt 9:36)

"Therefore take heed to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the
Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the church of God which
He purchased with His own blood. (Acts 20:28)

An elder should be a believer with a heart broken for the lost; moved
with compassion for the captives and passionate about Jesus. Such a
person is likely to lead a healthy church.

In addition to elders, God gives 'gifts' of apostles, prophets,
teachers, evangelists and pastors to help equip the church for ministry
(Eph 4). Although the NT does not make clear how these ministries
related to the local church and mission, it seems that the 5-fold gifts
spear-head and motivate church planting and lay the foundations of truth
and practice for churches. Meanwhile, the elders/leaders and saints get
on with the task of discipling and multiplying. No doubt some churches
had resident ministry gifts whilst others received input from visiting
ministries.

[^1]An elder is a man who is called and gifted by God, who with other
elders has the responsibility for leading a local church. Scripture
portrays him as a man who is:

-   Shaped by apostolic ministry

-   Able to lead himself

-   Able to lead his family

-   Able to lead his local church

The elder is responsible for the day-to-day discipleship of the church
and is rightly concerned with the details of individual's lives and the
particular challenges and delights of living out the Kingdom in the
community.

Self-control is the preeminent qualification for eldership and is the
only thing Paul tells Timothy to teach young men! Learning to lead
yourself is the key preparation necessary to lead others. If young
people can win this battle early, then they will develop into fine
leaders.[^2]

The devil lays snares for elders! Every potential elder must honestly
ask himself where his weak spots are. Where will the devil lay his
snare? Pride is a common snare, but there may be others. Do not appoint
elders hastily; examine their character and the fruit of their faith.

An elder should not be a novice, lest being puffed up with pride he fall
into the same condemnation as the devil. Moreover he must have a good
testimony among those who are outside, lest he fall into reproach and
the snare of the devil. (1Tim 3:6-7)

Elders should be transparent. What you see is what you get. Their 'yes'
means 'yes' and their 'no' means 'no'. Elders and deacons need to be
people of pure hearts and open spirits whom you know you can trust. If
they have not been trustworthy in handling worldly wealth, do not
entrust them with true riches.[^3]

"He who is faithful in what is least is faithful also in much; and he
who is unjust in what is least is unjust also in much. Therefore if you
have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to
your trust the true riches?" (Lk 16:10-11)

Elders must honour the priesthood of all believers and should therefore
always seek the counsel and mind of those they lead and involve them in
the process of decision-making.

The ministry gifts, especially the apostles and prophets, are called to
have a bigger vision and wider perspective on what is happening. There
tends to be a healthy tension between elders who want to strengthen
their local work with more leaders, and the apostles who want to push
those leaders out into new works. In addition, apostles and prophets are
more likely to see the foundational significance of certain events and
how they are responded to. This produces another healthy tension between
the pragmatism of an elder and the relative idealism of an apostle or
prophet. It is not that one is right and the other wrong, but that both
voices and influences are needed. The elder has the God given
responsibility to lead and care. The ministry gifts have the
responsibility to provoke. For this reason elders need to be continually
envisioned and equipped by apostles and their teams.

Teachers will have particular gifting in understanding the breadth of
truth in the scriptures, providing doctrinal perspective and balance.
They help to reveal simple truths that so easily get obscured by
tradition or worldly thinking. They help the saints to gain the
confidence to search the scriptures for themselves and take both the
meat and the milk of the word. They will not promote their own wisdom
with new interpretations, but appeal to the simplicity of the gospel and
the witness of the Spirit to bring clarity to the scriptures.

[^1]: PJ Smyth, "The world needs more elders" P11

[^2]: PJ Smyth, "The world needs more elders" P15

[^3]: PJ Smyth, "The world needs more elders" P20
