---
title: Holy Spirit HG Study pre pentecost sunday
type: document
---
# Holy Spirit

## Pentecost is the climax of the Gospel

Read Acts 2:1-21

## The experience of the Spirit

"On the last and greatest day of the Feast, Jesus stood and said in a
loud voice, \"If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, **streams of living
water will flow from within him**.\" By this he meant the Spirit, whom
those who believed in him were later to receive. Up to that time the
Spirit had not been given, since Jesus had not yet been glorified." (Joh
7:37-39 NIV)

"And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Counsellor to
be with you for ever--- the Spirit of truth. The world cannot accept
him, because it neither sees him nor knows him. But **you know him**,
for he lives with you and will be in you. I will not leave you as
orphans; I will come to you. Before long, the world will not see me
anymore, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live. On
that day **you will realise** that I am in my Father, and **you are in
me, and I am in you**. Whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the
one who loves me. He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too
will love him and show myself to him.\"" (Joh 14:16-21 NIV)

"But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, **he will guide you into all
truth**. He will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears,
and he will tell you what is yet to come. He **will bring glory to me**
by taking from what is mine and **making it known to you**." (Joh
16:5-15 NIV)

\"Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised,
which you have heard me speak about. For John baptised with water, but
in a few days you will be baptised with the Holy Spirit.\" \... But
**you will receive power** when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and **you
will be my witnesses** in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and
to the ends of the earth.\"" (Ac 1:4-8 NIV)
